sha256: e84f3211f2885d6f5b2748cc00cd2482746fc1818a374e8c043c73ed127dca8e  file: pdfs/CoheEtal96.pdf

A computational approach to prefrontal cortex,
cognitive control and schizophrenia: recent
developments and current challenges
JONATHAN D. COHEN1,2, TODD S. BRAVER1 a n d RANDALL C. O’REILLY1
1 Department
of P s y c h o l o g y ,Carnegie Mellon University,
2 Departmentof Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, U.S.A.

SU M M A R Y

In this chapter we consider the mechanisms involved in cognitive control —from both a computational
and a neurobiological perspective —and how these might be impaired in schizophrenia. By ‘control’, we
mean the ability of the cognitive system to flexibly adapt its behaviour to the demands of particular tasks,
favouring the processing of task-relevant information over other sources of competing information, and
mediating task-relevant behaviour over habitual, or otherwise prepotent responses. There is a large body
of evidence to suggest that the prefrontal cortex (PFC) plays a critical role in cognitive control. In
previous work, we have used a computational framework to understand and develop explicit models of
this function of PFC, and its impairment in schizophrenia. This work has lead to the hypothesis that PFC
houses a mechanism for representing and maintaining context information. We have demonstrated that
this mechanism can account for the behavioural inhibition and active memory functions commonly
ascribed to PFC, and for human performance in simple attention, language and memory tasks that draw
upon these functions for cognitive control. Furthermore, we have used our models to simulate detailed
patterns of cognitive deficit observed in schizophrenia, an illness associated with marked disturbances in
cognitive control, and well established deficits of PFC.
Here, we review results of recent empirical studies that test predictions made by our models regarding
schizophrenic performance in tasks designed specifically to probe the processing of context. These results
showed selective schizophrenic deficits in tasks conditions that placed the greatest demands on memory
and inhibition, both of which we have argued rely on the processing of context. Furthermore, we observed
predicted patterns of deterioration in first episode vs multi-episode patients. We also discuss recent
developments in our computational work, that have led to refinements of the models that allow us to
simulate more detailed aspects of task performance, such as reaction time data and manipulations of task
parameters such as interstimulus delay. These refined models make several provocative new predictions,
including conditions in which schizophrenics and control subjects are expected to show similar reaction
time performance, and we provide preliminary data in support of these predictions. These successes
notwithstanding, our theory of PFC function and its impairment in schizophrenia is still in an early stage
of development. We conclude by presenting some of the challenges to the theory in its current form, and
new directions that we have begun to take to meet these challenges. In particular, we focus on refinements
concerning the mechanisms underlying active maintenance of representations within PFC, and the
characteristics of these representations that allow them to support the flexibility of cognitive control
exhibited by normal human behaviour.
Taken in toto, we believe that this work illustrates the value of a computational approach for
understanding the mechanisms responsible for cognitive control, at both the neural and psychological
levels, and the specific manner in which they break down in schizophrenia.

1. IN T R O D U C T IO N
(a) Prefrontal cortex and cognitive control

One of the central concepts within modern cognitive
psychology is a distinction between controlled and
automatic processing. Controlled processing is classically defined as relying on a limited capacity attentional system, while automatic processing is assumed to
occur independently of attentional resources. Most
contemporary theories posit that there is actually a
continuum between controlled and automatic processing. Nevertheless, virtually all theorists acknowlPhil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B (1996) 351, 1515-1527

edge the need for some mechanism, or set of mechanisms responsible for the coordination of processing in a
flexible fashion —particularly in novel tasks —and their
relationship to attentional control. Perhaps the most
explicit of these is Baddeley’s theory of working
memory (Baddeley 1986), which postulates a specific
subcomponent responsible for executive control. The
postulation of a cognitive system involved in executive
control closely parallels theories concerning frontal
lobe involvement in executive functions (Bianchi 1922;
Damasio 1985; Luria 1969), and the long-standing
clinical observation that patients with frontal lesions

1515

Downloaded
from in Great
royalsocietypublishing.​
Printed
Britain org/​rstb/​article-pdf/​351/​1346/​1515/​84172/​rstb.​1996.​0138.​pdf
by Dartmouth Libraries user
on 30 September 2026

© 1996 The Royal Society

