sha256: 133d9c8a5d4eb1a8953c6d40a4c95142161a3ca64564f51e3bfd4cd4c5ded7cc  file: pdfs/FreuEtal09.pdf

OBSERVATION

Cognitive Functions in a Patient
With Parkinson-Dementia Syndrome
Undergoing Deep Brain Stimulation
Hans-Joachim Freund, MD; Jens Kuhn, MD; Doris Lenartz, MD; Jürgen K. Mai, MD;
Thomas Schnell, PhD; Joachim Klosterkoetter, MD; Volker Sturm, MD

Background: Dementia represents one of the most challenging health problems. Despite intense research, available therapies have thus far only achieved modest results. Deep brain stimulation (DBS) is an effective
treatment option for some movement disorders and is under study for psychiatric applications. Recently, diencephalic DBS revealed selective effects on memory functions, another facet of subcortical DBS.
Objective: To report a new DBS strategy for the modification of cognitive functions in a patient with severe
Parkinson-dementia syndrome.
Design: Prospective study with double-blinded sham

stimulation period.
Setting: Departments of Stereotaxy and Functional Neu-

rosurgery and Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
Patient: A 71-year-old man with slowly progressive Parkinson-dementia syndrome.
Intervention: We inserted 2 electrodes into the nucleus

basalis of Meynert in addition to electrodes in the subthalamic nucleus.

Results: Turning on the subthalamic nucleus electrodes improved motor symptoms but left cognitive
performance almost unchanged. Turning on electrical
stimulation of the nucleus basalis of Meynert resulted
in markedly improved cognitive functions. The
improvement in attention, concentration, alertness,
drive, and spontaneity resulted in the patient’s
renewed enjoyment of former interests and enhanced
social communication.
Conclusions: Such a broad effect on cognition
is consistent with ample experimental evidence
revealing that the nucleus basalis of Meynert provides
cholinergic innervation to the cortical mantle, complemented by glutaminergic and ␥-aminobutyric acid–
transmitting projections from the basal forebrain.
These projections provide background tuning facilitating cortical operations. Furthermore, nucleus basalis
of Meynert stimulation paired with sensory stimuli
can accomplish persistent reorganization of specific
processing modules. The improvements in cognitive
and behavioral performance in our patient are likely to
be related to the effects of stimulating residual cholinergic projections and cell bodies in the nucleus basalis
of Meynert.

Main Outcome Measure: Improvement of cognitive

Arch Neurol. 2009;66(6):781-785

functions.
Author Affiliations: Institute
for Neuroscience and Medicine
(INM-7) and Forschungszentrum Juelich, International
Neuroscience Institute,
Hannover (Dr Freund);
Departments of Psychiatry and
Psychotherapy (Drs Kuhn,
Schnell, and Klosterkoetter),
and Stereotaxy and Functional
Neurosurgery (Drs Lenartz and
Sturm), University of Cologne,
Cologne; and Institute of
Anatomy I, Heinrich-HeineUniversity of Duesseldorf,
Duesseldorf (Dr Mai), Germany.

R

EGARDING THE EFFECTS OF

deep brain stimulation
(DBS) of the subthalamic
nucleus (STN) on cognitive functions, a randomized, multicenter study showed that STNDBS does not reduce overall cognition but
is associated with a selective decrease in
frontal cognitive functions.1 Clear improvements in the cognitive state in patients with
Parkinson disease dementia (PDD) have so
far not been shown. We describe a new DBS
strategy for the modification of cognitive
functions by stimulating the nucleus basa-

(REPRINTED) ARCH NEUROL / VOL 66 (NO. 6), JUNE 2009
781

lis of Meynert (NBM) in addition to the STN
in a patient with PDD.
REPORT OF A CASE

A 71-year-old man developed slowly progressing PD over a 22-year period. At the
time of observation, the clinical picture was
characterized by akinetic-rigid PD without prominent tremor. For an extended period, the patient had responded well to dopaminergic medication but had increasingly
experienced on-off fluctuations over the last
2-3 years.

WWW.ARCHNEUROL.COM

©2009 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded from jamanetwork.​com by Dartmouth Libraries user on 09/​30/​2026

