sha256: 7113568608f81cbb791b974c4e58dce8fcf28265945204585caf4bd33cb62a38  file: pdfs/GhosEtal11.pdf

Articles

Miniaturized integration of a fluorescence microscope

© 2011 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.

Kunal K Ghosh1,2,5, Laurie D Burns2,5, Eric D Cocker2,5, Axel Nimmerjahn2, Yaniv Ziv2, Abbas El Gamal1 &
Mark J Schnitzer2–4
The light microscope is traditionally an instrument of
substantial size and expense. Its miniaturized integration
would enable many new applications based on mass-producible,
tiny microscopes. Key prospective usages include brain imaging
in behaving animals for relating cellular dynamics to animal
behavior. Here we introduce a miniature (1.9 g) integrated
fluorescence microscope made from mass-producible parts,
including a semiconductor light source and sensor. This device
enables high-speed cellular imaging across ~0.5 mm2 areas
in active mice. This capability allowed concurrent tracking of
Ca2+ spiking in >200 Purkinje neurons across nine cerebellar
microzones. During mouse locomotion, individual microzones
exhibited large-scale, synchronized Ca2+ spiking. This is
a mesoscopic neural dynamic missed by prior techniques
for studying the brain at other length scales. Overall, the
integrated microscope is a potentially transformative
technology that permits distribution to many animals and
enables diverse usages, such as portable diagnostics or
microscope arrays for large-scale screens.

Modern understanding of technology recognizes miniaturized
integration as a pivotal advance that facilitates low-cost production and typically leads to improved performance and unanticipated applications1. Such impact has been shown in diverse arenas,
including telecommunications, computing and genomics. One
technology that has largely resisted integration is the light microscope, which generally remains a bulky and costly tabletop instrument. In neuroscience, microscopy has achieved widespread use
in live animals, but the limitations of conventional microscopes
hamper the scope and scale of brain-imaging experiments 2. To
improve the accessibility, quality and throughput of brain-imaging
studies in freely behaving mice, we created a miniature, integrated
fluorescence microscope with a design permitting mass-­production
and high-speed tracking of neural dynamics. The microscope is
based on micro-optics and semiconductor optoelectronics, both
readily mass-fabricated, and integrates all optical parts in a tiny
package that is easily held by the fingertips. Compared to highresolution fiber-optic microscopes, our device offers advantages in
optical sensitivity, field of view, attainable resolution, mechanical
flexibility for the animal, cost and portability.

Previous methods for microscopy in behaving animals required
tabletop optical instrumentation that could not be readily distributed to many mice in parallel2–9. Some methods also required
head fixation of the mouse4,5,8,9, which is incompatible with standard rodent behavioral assays. Our microscope clears both these
challenges, is 1.9 g in mass and can be carried by an adult mouse
on its head. Electrical wires carry power, control signals and data
to and from the mouse, but these are sufficiently fine to permit a
highly flexible mechanical connection. This is unlike fiber-optic
microscopes, which are prone to exerting torque on the mouse
owing to the finite bending radius of the optical fiber.
We explored the integrated microscope’s capabilities for brain
imaging by visualizing cerebellar microcirculation across different
locomotor behaviors. The ~500% increase in optical ­throughput
over our prior fiber-optic microscope6 improved data quality
sufficiently that we could analyze capillary diameters and flow
speeds with seconds-scale resolution rather than averaging over
behavioral epochs6. Although we had expected capillaries across
the imaging field would be regulated uniformly, only a spatially
scattered minority of vessels significantly changed diameters
and flow speeds as the mouse switched from resting to active
­behaviors. Capillary regulation may thus have unanticipated
precision at the tens of micrometers scale.
We also tracked Ca2+ spiking in up to 206 individual cerebellar
Purkinje neurons, ~700% more than with our fiber-optic microscope6. The improved throughput implied our recordings required
lower illumination power and lasted up to 1 h without noticeable
photobleaching. These improvements allowed collection of far
larger Ca2+-spiking datasets, enabling the initial analysis in freely
behaving mice of higher-order spiking correlations among Purkinje
neurons. This revealed synchronized Ca2+ spiking that arose
during motor behavior in individual cerebellar microzones.
Beyond brain imaging, there has been considerable recognition of new applications that would be enabled by miniaturized
integration of the light microscope, particularly portable, imagebased diagnostics and high-throughput screening10. Past efforts
to address these have yielded miniaturized devices that needed
accessory, conventional optical instrumentation11,12 or that did
not permit fluorescence imaging and made specialized assumptions about the specimen13,14.

1David Packard Electrical Engineering Building, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA. 2James H. Clark Center, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA.
3Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA. 4CNC Program, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA. 5These authors

contributed equally to this work. Correspondence should be addressed to M.J.S. (mschnitz@stanford.edu).

Received 29 November 2010; accepted 2 August 2011; published online 11 september 2011; doi:10.1038/nmeth.1694

nature methods | VOL.8 NO.10 | OCTOBER 2011 | 871

