sha256: b83885f420f62a4bb8604351b686d2947de16dd17030dfc636d4d68d1fc9b595  file: pdfs/IyyeEtal15.pdf

Deep Unordered Composition Rivals Syntactic Methods
for Text Classification
Mohit Iyyer,1 Varun Manjunatha,1 Jordan Boyd-Graber,2 Hal Daumé III1
1
University of Maryland, Department of Computer Science and UMIACS
2
University of Colorado, Department of Computer Science
{miyyer,varunm,hal}@umiacs.umd.edu, Jordan.Boyd.Graber@colorado.edu

Abstract

results have shown that syntactic functions outperform unordered functions on many tasks (Socher
et al., 2013b; Kalchbrenner and Blunsom, 2013).
However, there is a tradeoff: syntactic functions
require more training time than unordered composition functions and are prohibitively expensive in
the case of huge datasets or limited computing resources. For example, the recursive neural network
(Section 2) computes costly matrix/tensor products
and nonlinearities at every node of a syntactic parse
tree, which limits it to smaller datasets that can be
reliably parsed.
We introduce a deep unordered model that obtains near state-of-the-art accuracies on a variety of
sentence and document-level tasks with just minutes of training time on an average laptop computer.
This model, the deep averaging network (DAN),
works in three simple steps:

Many existing deep learning models for
natural language processing tasks focus on
learning the compositionality of their inputs, which requires many expensive computations. We present a simple deep neural
network that competes with and, in some
cases, outperforms such models on sentiment analysis and factoid question answering tasks while taking only a fraction
of the training time. While our model is
syntactically-ignorant, we show significant
improvements over previous bag-of-words
models by deepening our network and applying a novel variant of dropout. Moreover, our model performs better than syntactic models on datasets with high syntactic variance. We show that our model
makes similar errors to syntactically-aware
models, indicating that for the tasks we consider, nonlinearly transforming the input is
more important than tailoring a network to
incorporate word order and syntax.

1

1. take the vector average of the embeddings
associated with an input sequence of tokens
2. pass that average through one or more feedforward layers
3. perform (linear) classification on the final
layer’s representation

Introduction

Vector space models for natural language processing (NLP) represent words using low dimensional
vectors called embeddings. To apply vector space
models to sentences or documents, one must first
select an appropriate composition function, which
is a mathematical process for combining multiple
words into a single vector.
Composition functions fall into two classes: unordered and syntactic. Unordered functions treat input texts as bags of word embeddings, while syntactic functions take word order and sentence structure
into account. Previously published experimental

The model can be improved by applying a novel
dropout-inspired regularizer: for each training instance, randomly drop some of the tokens’ embeddings before computing the average.
We evaluate DANs on sentiment analysis and factoid question answering tasks at both the sentence
and document level in Section 4. Our model’s successes demonstrate that for these tasks, the choice
of composition function is not as important as initializing with pretrained embeddings and using a
deep network. Furthermore, DANs, unlike more
complex composition functions, can be effectively
trained on data that have high syntactic variance. A

1681

Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
and the 7th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 1681–1691,
Beijing, China, July 26-31, 2015. c 2015 Association for Computational Linguistics

