sha256: 7318533406d8dc97f955f26fe0e15256cffa858618fd602eacb98e34cfc784ff  file: pdfs/MacWEtal01.pdf

Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers
2001, 33 (2), 287-296

STEP—A System for Teaching
Experimental Psychology using E-Prime
BRIAN MACWHINNEY
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
JAMES ST. JAMES
Millikin University, Decatur, Illinois
CHRIS SCHUNN
George Mason University, Fairfax, Virginia
PING LI
University of Richmond, Richmond, Virginia
and
WALTER SCHNEIDER
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Students in psychology need to learn to design and analyze their own experiments. However, software that allows students to build experiments on their own has been limited in a variety of ways. The
shipping of the first full release of the E-Prime system later this year will open up a new opportunity
for addressing this problem. Because E-Prime promises to become the standard for building experiments in psychology, it is now possible to construct a Web-based resource that uses E-Prime as the delivery engine for a wide variety of instructional materials. This new system, funded by the National Science Foundation, is called STEP (System for the Teaching of Experimental Psychology). The goal of
the STEP Project is to provide instructional materials that will facilitate the use of E-Prime in various
learning contexts. We are now compiling a large set of classic experiments implemented in E-Prime and
available over the Internet from http://step.psy.cmu.edu. The Web site also distributes instructional materials for building courses in experimental psychology based on E-Prime.

The teaching of Experimental Psychology is at a crossroads. In order to learn what it means to conduct empirical research in psychology, students need to be able to
design and analyze their own experiments. However, despite a massive investment in personal computer technology on the university level, the tools that allow students
to build their own experiments are inadequate in a variety of ways. This means that few students end up learning what the science of psychologyis really all about. Only
by building, running, and analyzing their own experiments can students understand basic principles of experimental design and the way in which theories can be subjected to empirical tests.
During the period between 1987 and 1995, there were
10 major attempts to address aspects of this problem
through the building of experiment generation (EG) systems. These included B/C Power Lab, ERTS, MacLaboratory, MEL, MacProbe, MindLab, MPS, PsychLab, Psy-

Send correspondence to B. MacWhinney, Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 (e-mail:
macw@cmu.edu).

Scope, and SuperLab. Among the top 10 EG systems, the
3 that have achieved the largest acceptance nationally and
internationally are MEL, PsyScope, and SuperLab. Although SuperLab is easy to learn, its ability to create highquality reaction time experiments with complex design
features is limited. MEL was limited to the DOS platform
and had no graphic user interface. PsyScope was the first
EG system that allowed advanced undergraduates and
graduate students to build complex, high-quality experiments without programming. Vaughan and Yee (1994)
provided tutorial materials for PsyScope (http://psyscope.
psy.cmu.edu and http://cogito.hamilton.edu). Unfortunately, PsyScope runs only on Macintosh and has no commercial basis that would fund further development or porting to Windows.
E-Prime is a joint effort by the developers of the earlier
MEL and PsyScope systems, working in the commercial
framework of Psychology Software Tools (PST) in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.It is the first industrial strength, commercial EG system. Supported by its tutorials, visuals,
and wizards, a beginning user can design a new E-Prime
experiment in an average time of 80 min. Because E-Prime
is likely to emerge as the standard for building experi-

287

Copyright 2001 Psychonomic Society, Inc.

