sha256: 0688f196d7d93bfd81571d4049cfc41e2b97da228c47d5b14ed5b1d2f18a25cb  file: pdfs/MullWehn94.pdf

J Comp Physiol A (1994) 175:525-530

9 Springer-Verlag 1994

M. Miiller 9R. Wehner

The hidden spiral: systematic search and path integration
in desert ants, Cataglyphi$ forti$

Accepted: 13 July 1994

A b s t r a c t The main navigational mechanism used by
foraging desert ants of the genus Cataglyphis is path integration (dead reckoning). Any such egocentric system
of navigation is prone to cumulative navigational errors.
Hence, while homing Cataglyphis might have reset its
path integration system and yet not arrived at the start of
its foraging excursion, the nest entrance. Then it resorts
to piloting or performs a systematic search for the nest.
The search pattern consists of a system of loops of everincreasing size centred about the origin, i.e. the start of
the search. Here we show that underlying the system of
loops is a spiral search programme that gets transformed
into the observed pattern of loops by the ant's idiosyncratic path-integration algorithm. The ant starts to follow
a spiral course, then breaks off this course and walks towards the centre, i.e. to what its path-integration system
has computed to be the origin of the search. This reset
episode is followed by another spiral course, which is
terminated by the next reset, and so forth. After each reset, the spiral gets wider, so that the whole pattern expands. Futhermore, every now and then the spiral might
change its sign. Computer simulations based on these
simple rules lead to search patterns of the kind actually
recorded in Cataglyphis ants. These patterns ensure that
those parts of the area in which the target (nest entrance)
is most likely to be located are searched most heavily; in
other words: the search density profile is adapted to the
probability density function of the target.
Key words Systematic search 9 Path integration
Dead reckoning 9Desert ants 9 Cataglyphis

Introduction
Whenever a Cataglyphis ant gets lost, it performs a systematic search to finally locate the nest entrance, a tiny
M. M~iller 9R. Wehner ( ~ )
Zoologisches Institut der Universit~itZiirich,
Winterthurerstrasse 190, CH-8057 Ztirich, Switzerland

hole in a desert plain. This usually occurs when the ant
has returned from a foraging trip and when its path integration (dead reckoning) system has not led it exactly to
the nest entrance, i.e. when the tip of the home vector
does not coincide with the nest entrance. As shown earlier (Wehner and Srinivasan 1981; Wehner and Wehner
1986), the search pattern consists of a number of loops
of ever-increasing size starting and ending at the origin
and pointing at different azimuthal directions. The search
density profile is the flatter, the larger the distance from
which the ant has returned from its foraging excursion,
and hence the larger the errors that might have accumulated during the foray (Fig. 3.35 in Wehner 1992). This
finding suggests that the search density profile is adapted
to the target density function. The latter function describes the distribution of the tips of the home vectors recorded in series of path-integration tests.
Irrespective, however, of how flat or peaked the search
density profile actually is, the ant concentrates its search
activity on those areas in which the probability of encountering the target (nest) is largest, i.e. spends most of
its time searching at locations where the nest is most likely to be. By assuming that at the beginning of the search
the a priori probability density function is Gaussian in
two dimensions, and by further assuming that the probability of encountering the nest within a certain region decreases as the time spent searching that region increases,
Wehner and Srinivasan (1981) formulated what, on purely theoretical grounds, would be an efficient search strategy. In their model the most promising region to search is
specified by an a posteriori probability density function
which takes the ant's past performance into account. The
model successfully describes the ant's real performance.
However, the theoretical model relates more to the
functional significance of the geometry of the search pattern rather than to the navigational mechanism underlying the search. As to the latter, it has only been shown
(Wehner and Srinivasan 1981) that the ant's path integration system is continuously running while the ant performs its systematic search (as it is during the ant's return from a foraging excursion: Schmidt et al. 1992).

