sha256: 504f7d96514f1dbbece8c1840695b214eabcc5ef788071904bbb3e93894af86b  file: pdfs/NybeEtal03.pdf

Neural correlates of training-related memory
improvement in adulthood and aging
Lars Nyberg*†, Johan Sandblom‡, Sari Jones§, Anna Stigsdotter Neely*, Karl Magnus Petersson‡¶, Martin Ingvar‡,
and Lars Bäckman§
*Department of Psychology, Umeå University, S-901 87 Umeå, Sweden; ‡Cognitive Neurophysiology Research Group R2-01, Department of Clinical
Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, S-17176 Stockholm, Sweden; §Aging Research Center, Division of Geriatric Epidemiology, Neurotec,
Karolinska Institutet, and Stockholm Gerontology Research Center, S-11382 Stockholm, Sweden; and ¶Cognitive Neurology and
Memory Research Group, F. C. Donders Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging, NL-6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands

Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by DARTMOUTH COLLEGE; ACQ SERVICES/SERIALS A on September 30, 2026 from IP address 129.170.192.77.

Communicated by Endel Tulving, Rotman Research Institute of Baycrest Centre, North York, Canada, August 27, 2003 (received for review May 10, 2003)

Cognitive studies show that both younger and older adults can
increase their memory performance after training in using a visuospatial mnemonic, although age-related memory deficits tend to
be magnified rather than reduced after training. Little is known
about the changes in functional brain activity that accompany
training-induced memory enhancement, and whether age-related
activity changes are associated with the size of training-related
gains. Here, we demonstrate that younger adults show increased
activity during memory encoding in occipito-parietal and frontal
brain regions after learning the mnemonic. Older adults did not
show increased frontal activity, and only those elderly persons
who benefited from the mnemonic showed increased occipitoparietal activity. These findings suggest that age-related differences in cognitive reserve capacity may reflect both a frontal
processing deficiency and a posterior production deficiency.

T

he existence of age-related deficits in episodic memory
functioning are well documented (1). Given the impact of
such deficits, much research has been directed at examining
possible means of enhancing memory performance in older
adults by various forms of cognitive support (2). One approach
that has received considerable attention involves estimation of
latent cognitive potential, or cognitive reserve capacity, in older
age (3). In one variant of this approach, younger and older
participants are given training in using a classical mnemonic, the
method of loci (4), to memorize and retrieve words. This method
involves learning to visualize a series of mental landmarks (e.g.,
places along one’s route to work). After acquisition of the
landmarks, the to-be-remembered information is linked to the
various loci at the time of encoding. At test, the landmarks are
mentally revisited in serial order, and the information associated
with each locus is retrieved.
Serial recall is substantially enhanced by the loci mnemonic for
both younger and older adults (5, 6), demonstrating cognitive
reserve capacity in aging (i.e., cognitive reserve capacity is
defined as the ability to enhance one’s memory performance
after learning a mnemonic). However, the most striking aspect
of previous findings is that age differences in memory performance are magnified rather than reduced after training (7). This
pattern of results suggests an age-related decrease in cognitive
reserve capacity. Little is known about the basis for this phenomenon. Baltes and Kliegl (7) hypothesized that older adults
may have difficulty in forming novel relations between the
landmarks and the to-be-remembered information (i.e., a difficulty in using rather than acquiring the mnemonic), and they
proposed neurobiological constraints as a determinant of this
deficit. However, no direct evidence for this account has been
provided. Here, we present the results from an age-comparative
positron emission tomography (PET) study of the neural underpinnings of acquisition and use of the loci method.

phase, as outlined in Fig. 1a, was carried out while the participants were placed in the scanner (data on background variables
were collected before scanning). In pretest 1-2 the participants
were instructed to encode 18 words in the order they were
presented. They were scanned during encoding and immediately
after encoding兾scanning they were instructed to orally recall the
encoded words (serial recall). In loci acquisition 1-3 participants
were instructed to memorize a list of 18 words denoting locations
in the order they were presented (the loci list). They were
scanned during location encoding, and immediately after encoding兾scanning they were instructed to orally recall the locations (serial recall of locations). In between each scan in the
acquisition phase, the participants were presented the loci list
and instructed to try to memorize the locations. Hence, after loci
acquisition 3, the loci list had been presented seven times. At that
point, if a participant was unable to recall the list of locations in
correct serial order in two consecutive runs with a maximum of
one error, additional training was given until the criterion was
reached. Only one participant needed additional training. Finally, in posttest 1-2 the participants were instructed to use the
loci that they learned in the acquisition phase to encode 18 words
in serial order (loci utilization). They were scanned during
encoding, and immediately after encoding兾scanning they were
instructed to orally recall the words (serial recall). In between
scans in the utilization phase, participants practiced using the
loci method by using the same word for all locations (e.g., the
participants were instructed to imagine placing a ball in each of
the loci and then to retrieve the ball from each loci while walking
through the imagined home). Seven baseline tasks were interspersed throughout the scanning protocol. During these tasks,
participants were to covertly count the number of abstract words
in a list of 18 words. In all 14 scans, each word was presented for
5,000 ms with no delay between words.
Word Lists. Three types of word lists with words varying between
five and eight letters in length were prepared. The words were
presented in black lowercase letters on a white computer screen.
For pretest and posttest, four lists of 18 concrete words were
used. The lists were equal with regard to mean word frequency,
according to established Swedish norms (8). The lists were
randomly assigned to be either pretest or posttest lists for each
participant. For loci acquisition, a list of 18 words representing
locations in a home was used (e.g., bed, cupboard, sofa). The
locations and their presentation order were the same for each
participant. For the baseline task we used seven lists of 18 words,
3–6 abstract words per list, and the rest concrete words. The
presentation order of baseline lists was randomized across
participants.

Methods

Abbreviation: PET, positron emission tomography.

Tasks and Procedure. The whole experiment, including a pretest

†To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: lars.nyberg@psy.umu.se.

phase, a loci acquisition phase, and a loci utilization posttest
13728 –13733 兩 PNAS 兩 November 11, 2003 兩 vol. 100 兩 no. 23

© 2003 by The National Academy of Sciences of the USA

www.pnas.org兾cgi兾doi兾10.1073兾pnas.1735487100

