sha256: ef7378680d42afbd70e7fd9435efa426d2cefdf04ea53277906a59fe3549bc16  file: pdfs/RebeEtal02.pdf

The Journal of Neuroscience, November 1, 2002, 22(21):9541–9548

Neural Correlates of Successful Encoding Identified Using
Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Paul J. Reber,1,3 Robert M. Siwiec,1 Darren R. Gitleman,2,3 Todd B. Parrish,2,3 M.-Marsel Mesulam,3 and
Ken A. Paller1,3
Departments of 1Psychology and 2Radiology and the 3Cognitive Neurology and Alzheimer’s Disease Center,
Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois 60201

Neural activity that occurs during the creation of a new memory
trace can be observed using functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI). Event-related designs have been used to demonstrate that activity in prefrontal and medial temporal lobe
areas is associated with successful memory storage. Here we
contrasted activity associated with encoding success and encoding effort. Participants viewed a series of 150 words but
attempted to remember only half of them. Encoding effort was
manipulated using a cue in the form of a letter (R or F) presented after each word to instruct participants either to remember or to forget that word. Increased activity in left inferior
Neuropsychological evidence indicates that memory for recently
experienced episodes depends critically on a number of interconnected brain regions, including the medial temporal lobe (MTL)
and prefrontal cortex (Squire and Knowlton, 2000; Squire and
Schacter, 2002). Although lesion evidence has been useful for
implicating brain regions that are necessary for the expression of
episodic memories, it is more difficult to ascertain whether these
regions make their contributions to the formation, storage, and
retrieval of memories. Functional imaging allows examination of
the contributions of various brain regions to memory and of how
coordination between multiple processes supports memory performance. In the present study, event-related functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) was used to investigate the neural
correlates of memory encoding.
Neural events responsible for the formation of episodic memories have been investigated previously (for review, see Paller and
Wagner, 2002). Wagner et al. (1998) acquired fMRI data while
participants made concrete/abstract judgments about words.
Words subsequently recognized with high confidence, compared
with forgotten words, were associated with encoding-related activity in left inferior prefrontal cortex (LIPFC) (BA 44, 45, and
47) and left parahippocampal gyrus (BA 35/36). Brewer et al.
(1998) devised a similar experiment in which participants performed indoor/outdoor discriminations on visual scenes. Subsequent recognition was associated with increased activation of
right prefrontal cortex and bilateral parahippocampal cortex. In
both cases, increased MTL activity predicted encoding success,
Received Feb. 15, 2002; revised July 31, 2002; accepted Aug. 21, 2002.
This research was supported by National Institutes of Health Grants R01MH58748 (P.J.R.) and R01-NS34639 (K.A.P.). We thank Patrick Skosnik and Sara
Polis for assistance with data collection, data analysis, and manuscript preparation.
Correspondence should be addressed to Dr. Paul J. Reber, Department of
Psychology, Northwestern University, 2029 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60201.
E-mail: preber@northwestern.edu.
Copyright © 2002 Society for Neuroscience 0270-6474/02/229541-08$15.00/0

prefrontal cortex was observed when words were followed by
the cue to remember. In contrast, increased left medial temporal lobe activity was observed for words that were successfully
recalled later. These results show that fMRI correlates of the
intention to encode a word are different from fMRI correlates of
whether that encoding is successful. Prefrontal activation was
strongly associated with intentional verbal encoding, whereas
left medial temporal activation was crucial for the encoding that
actually led to successful memory on the subsequent test.
Key words: episodic memory; medial temporal lobe; prefrontal
cortex; event-related fMRI; subsequent memory; encoding effort
whereas the laterality of this effect was stimulus specific (left
hemisphere for words, right hemisphere for pictures). Encoding
processes varied across items because of fluctuations in participants’ attention to the stimuli, attention to the task, or the use of
particular processing strategies such as semantic elaboration. Furthermore, certain stimuli may precipitate successful memory encoding attributable to distinctiveness or idiosyncratically salient
features. Therefore, it is advantageous to combine the subsequent
memory methodology, as used in these previous experiments,
with experimental manipulations that specifically influence
encoding.
In the present study, we monitored neural activity associated
with encoding and analyzed the influence of two factors. The first
was whether later recognition was successful. The second was the
extent to which the participant intended to memorize the stimulus information. Intention to remember was manipulated with a
procedure known as directed forgetting (DF). Typical DF procedures entail cues to participants to remember some items and
forget others. DF instructions at encoding can have a robust
influence on subsequent memorability (Bjork, 1989; Golding and
MacLeod, 1998).
Participants viewed words and faces and were instructed to
remember or forget individual items on the basis of a cue presented 1 sec after each stimulus. The 1 sec delay gave participants
adequate time to perceive, identify, and attend to each study item
before knowing whether to remember or forget. For analysis,
trials were sorted on the basis of the instruction (remember/
forget) as well as on the subsequent memory outcome, assessed
with a post-scan recognition test. We thus contrasted encoding
intention and encoding success.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Participants. T welve right-handed volunteers (9 women, 3 men) between
the ages of 18 and 25 years (mean ⫽ 20) were recruited from the

