sha256: 3061a1b5306904105d618ee2cf9f8f9355ad71e8b605e64cdd3e89d05b8203be  file: pdfs/RhoaEtal13.pdf

87

THE OPEN COURSEWARE MOVEMENT IN HIGHER EDUCATION:
UNMASKING POWER AND RAISING QUESTIONS ABOUT
THE MOVEMENT’S DEMOCRATIC POTENTIAL
Robert A. Rhoads, Jennifer Berdan, and Brit Toven-Lindsey
Graduate School of Education and Information Studies
University of California, Los Angeles

Abstract. In this essay Robert Rhoads, Jennifer Berdan, and Brit Toven-Lindsey examine some of the
key literature related to the open courseware (OCW) movement (including the emergence and expansion
of massive open online courses, or MOOCs), focusing particular attention on the movement’s democratic
potential. The discussion is organized around three central problems, all relating in some manner or form
to issues of power: the problem of epistemology, the problem of pedagogy, and the problem of hegemony.
More specifically, the authors raise issues related to the narrow notion of knowledge typically conveyed
in the OCW movement, a limited understanding of what constitutes empowering pedagogy, and the
lack of treatment of inequities associated with the production of courseware materials. The authors go
on to argue that the lack of critical analysis of the OCW movement is tied to its relative alignment
with educational reforms driven by neoliberal ideology and that such alignment serves to limit the
movement’s democratic possibilities.

Introduction
With advances in web technologies over the past two decades, educational
opportunities accessible through the Internet have expanded dramatically.1 The
Web 2.0, as some have described it, has enabled users to interact with knowledge
and information in more active and collaborative ways in a variety of educational
formats. Indeed, the term ‘‘social learning’’ has become common parlance among
many Internet-savvy educators, instructional development staff, and technology
and information scholars when they speak of contemporary online learning or elearning opportunities.2 A cornucopia of Internet-related educational innovations
— including social networking, blogs, wikis, cognitive tutors, virtual learning
communities, and learning management systems (LMS) — have enabled further
advances in the sharing of educational ideas, materials, and knowledge.3
1. Daniel E. Atkins, John Seely Brown, and Allen L. Hammond, ‘‘A Review of the Open Educational
Resources (OER) Movement: Achievements, Challenges, and New Opportunities’’ (San Francisco:
Creative Commons License, 2007); Curtis J. Bonk, The World Is Open: How Web Technology Is
Revolutionizing Education (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2009); and John Seely Brown and Richard
P. Adler, ‘‘Minds on Fire: Open Education, the Long Tail, and Learning 2.0,’’ Educause Review 43, no. 1
(2008): 17–22.
2. John Seely Brown, ‘‘Foreword: Creating a Culture of Learning,’’ in Opening Up Education: The
Collective Advancement of Education Through Open Technology, Open Content, and Open Knowledge,
Creative Commons edition, ed. Toru Iiyoshi and M.S. Vijay Kumar (Princeton, New Jersey: Carnegie
Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching, 2008), xi–xvii; and Brown and Adler, ‘‘Minds on Fire.’’
3. Atkins, Brown, and Hammond, ‘‘A Review of the Open Educational Resources (OER) Movement’’;
Brown, ‘‘Foreword: Creating a Culture of Learning’’; Brown and Adler, ‘‘Minds on Fire’’; and Thomas E.
Malloy, Gary C. Jensen, Alison Regan, and Mary Reddick, ‘‘Open Courseware and Shared Knowledge in
Higher Education,’’ Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, and Computers 34, no. 2 (2002): 200–203.
EDUCATIONAL THEORY
Volume 63
Number 1
© 2013 Board of Trustees
University of Illinois

2013

