sha256: 641f859e1c29c9e2e4185bad33847abc4b00ad80f74e73385a3490018945d634  file: pdfs/RobeEtal99.pdf

HIPPOCAMPUS 9:206–219 (1999)

RESEARCH ARTICLES
Head Direction Cells in the Primate Pre-Subiculum
Robert G. Robertson, Edmund T. Rolls,*
Pierre Georges-François, and Stefano Panzeri
Department of Experimental Psychology,
University of Oxford, Oxford, England

ABSTRACT:
The function of the primate hippocampus and related
structures was analysed by making recordings from the hippocampus,
subiculum, presubiculum, and parahippocampal gyrus in monkeys actively walking in the laboratory. Head direction cells were found in the
presubiculum. The firing rate of these cells was a function of the head
direction of the monkey, with a response that was typically 10–100 times
larger to the best as compared to the opposite direction. The mean
half-amplitude width of the tuning of the cells was 76°. The response of
head direction cells in the presubiculum was not influenced by the place
where the monkey was, there being the same tuning to head direction at
different places in a room, and even outside the room. The response of
these cells was also independent of the ‘‘spatial view’’ observed by the
monkey, and also the position of the eyes in the head. The average
information about head direction was 0.64 bits, about place was 0.10 bits,
about spatial view was 0.27 bits, and about eye position was 0.04 bits. The
cells maintained their tuning for periods of at least several minutes when
the view details were obscured or the room was darkened. This representation of head direction could be useful together with the hippocampal
spatial view cells and whole body motion cells found in primates in such
spatial and memory functions as path integration. Hippocampus 1999;
9:206–219. r 1999 Wiley-Liss, Inc.
KEY WORDS:
subiculum

hippocampus; space; view; place; memory; monkey;

Damage to the temporal lobe, which includes the hippocampal formation, or to one of its main connection pathways, the fornix, produces
amnesia (see Scoville and Milner, 1957; Squire and Knowlton, 1994;
Gaffan, 1994). One of the memory deficits in amnesic humans is a major
impairment in remembering not just what objects have been seen recently,
but also where they have been seen (Smith and Milner, 1981). In
experimental studies in monkeys to define the crucial structures to which
damage produces memory impairments, it has been shown that hippocampal or fornix damage produces deficits in learning about where objects have
been seen, in object-place memory tasks (Parkinson et al., 1988; Angeli et
al., 1993; Gaffan, 1994). To analyze how the hippocampus operates to help
implement this type of memory, recordings have been made from single
neurons in the hippocampus while monkeys perform object-place memory

Grant sponsor: Medical Research Council; Grant number: PG8513579;
Grant sponsor: Human Frontier Science Program.
*Correspondence to: E.T. Rolls, Department of Experimental Psychology,
University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3UD England.
E-mail: Edmund.Rolls@psy.ox.ac.uk
Accepted for publication 5 January 1998

r 1999 WILEY-LISS, INC.

tasks in which they must remember where on a video
monitor a picture has been shown. It was found that
approximately 10% of hippocampal neurons responded
when images were shown in some positions on the screen
(Rolls et al., 1989). Moreover, the representation was in
allocentric (world) rather than egocentric (related to the
body) coordinates, in that the spatial fields of these
neurons remained in the same position on the video
monitor even when the whole monitor was moved
relative to the monkey’s body axis (Feigenbaum and
Rolls, 1991).
However, in rats, the spatial representation provided
by hippocampal neurons that has been described is of
the place where the rat is (O’Keefe and Speakman,
1987). A theory that the hippocampus is a computer for
spatial navigation, computing bearings, and distances to
the next place, has been built on the basis of the
properties of rat place cells (Burgess et al., 1994).
Because it is not clear whether the primate hippocampus
should be considered a spatial computer, with perhaps
place cells like those of rats (Ono et al., 1993), or is
instead a structure involved in storing memories including memories with a spatial component such as where an
object has been seen, we recorded from single hippocampal neurons while monkeys were moved to different
places in a cue-controlled spatial environment. We
found ‘‘spatial view’’ cells that responded to the position
in space a monkey could see, rather than the place where
the monkey was (Rolls and O’Mara, 1995). However,
because it is only during active locomotion that the place
fields of rat hippocampal neurons become evident
(Foster et al., 1989), we set up a recording situation to
allow active walking by the monkey, in a rich spatial
environment. We again found ‘‘spatial view’’ cells that
responded when the monkey looked at one part of the
environment, but not when he looked at another (Rolls
et al., 1997a). The majority of these cells (in, e.g., CA1)
can respond when the view details are obscured, so that
they encode an abstract representation of space (Robertson et al., 1998). The use of information theoretic
techniques has shown that the information available
from an ensemble of these cells increases approximately

