sha256: 3b5992cd104d90093f3e61121a30842b6935ce88f42ee488c2b13fdc713ac39f  file: pdfs/SteeEtal97.pdf

Copyright O Munksgaard 1997

Eur J Oral Sci 1997: 105: 305-309
Prinled in UK. At! rights reserved

EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF
ORAL SCIENCES
ISSN O9l)9-8S36

Peter A. Steerenberg'',
Use A. van Asperen^,
Aria van Nieuw Amerongen^,
Jeike Biewenga", Damaris MoP,
Gertjan Medema^

Salivary levels of
immunoglobulin A in
triathletes
Steerenberg PA. Van Asperen lA, Van Nieuw Amerongen A, Biewenga J, Mol D
and Medema GJ: Salivary levels of immunoglobulin A in triathletes Eur J Oral
Sci 1997: 105: 305-309. © Munksgaard. 1997
We investigated whether the physical exercise of an Olympic distance triathloti
affected the salivary IgA excretion of Iriathleles. as a biomarker for mucosal
immune defence. 42 triathletes participated in the study. It was found that the
salivary flow rate was decreased significantly after the race, thereby resulting in
a significant reduction of the total salivary IgA output. The salivary IgA
concentration (mg IgA/ml) did not differ, but expressed as total salivary
protein, a significant reduction was obser\'ed. This was on the account of the
salivary protem concentration (mg protein/ml), which was significantly
increased. Tn contrast to the IgA secretion, the salivary amylase activity was
increased significantly after the race. Therefore, our data suggest that the
exercise of a triathlon may decrease the level of IgA-mediated immune
protection at the mucosal surface. As triathletes may during the race be
exposed to micro-organisms present in the swimming water, a decreased IgAmediated immunity during the race may pose triathletes at an increased risk of
infections.

The influence of exercise on the resistance to infections is still uncertain (1-4). There are a number
of studies in which an association between infectious episodes and exercise was observed (5-7),
while in other studies, such associations were not
found (8, 9). This is partly due to the complex
interaction between pathogens and host-defence
mechanisms, as well as to the variable nature of
exercise (1). It has been suggested that light to
moderate exercise may increase immune responsiveness, whereas high-level competition sports may
lead to immunosuppression. (10). Intensity, duration and chronicity of physical exercise may determine the magnitude of the immunoalterations (11).
Strenuous exercise seems to influence natural
immunity and T- and B-cell functions (11), however, many of the eiffects of exercise on immune
function appear to be transient, and most of the
alterations reverse within hours of the exercise
stimulus (2).
One of the components of the immune system
that is affected by strenuous physical exercise is the
excretion of salivary immunoglobulin A (IgA). In

'Laboratory for Pathology and
Immunobiology, ^Department of Infectious
Diseases Epidemioiogy, National Institute of
Public Health and the Environment, P.O.
Box 1 3720 BA Biithoven, The Netherlands.
'Department of Oral Biochemistry,
"^Department of Ce!i Bioiogy and
immiunology. Free University Amsterdam.
"Microbiologicai Laboratory for Health
Protection, National institute of Pubiic
Health and the Environment, PO Box 1,
3720 BA Biithoven, The Netherlands.
Key words: immunosuppression; secretory
immunogiobulin A; exercise

Peter A Steerenberg, Laboratory for
Pathology and immunobiotogy, Nationai
Institute of Public Health and the
Environment, P.O. Box 1 3720 BA
Biithoven, The Netherlands
Telefax: +31-302744437
E-maii: p.steerenberg@rivm.ni
Accepted for pubiication Aprii 1997

most but not al! (12-14) studies, it lias been shown
that levels of salivary IgA decrease during such
exercise (15-18). Secretory IgA, which is the predominant immunoglobulin in mucosal fluids, has
been found to be a major effector of host-resistance
to many pathogenic micro-organisms. Secretory
IgA has been shown to inhibit attachment and
replication of certain pathogens and to be capable
of neutralizing viruses and toxins (14, 20).
In a study to assess the possible health risk of
freshwater bathing, we used triathletes as a model
for bathers and compared them with ruii-bikerunners as non-bathers (21). As triathletes may be
more susceptible to infections than recreative
bathers due to a possible immutiosuppression, we
studied salivary IgA secretion, as a biomarker for
mucosal defences, in a selection of triathletes before
and immediately after the race.
Methods
study population

A total of 142 triathletes participated in the
Olympic Distance triathlon in Driebriiggen, The

