Relating Theory and Data:
Essays on Human Memory
in Honor of Bennet B. Murdock




              Copyrighted Material
Copyrighted Material
Relating Theory and Data:
Essays on Human Memory
in Honor of Bennet B. Murdock



Edited by
William E. Hockley
Wilfrid Laurier University
Stephan Lewandowsky
University of Oklahoma




         LAWRENCE ERLBAUM ASSOCIATES, PUBLISHERS
  1991   Hillsdale, New Jersey     Hove and London




                       Copyrighted Material
Copyright ec> 1991 by Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
   All rights reserved. No part of the book may be reproduced in
   any form, by photostat, microform, retrieval system, or any other
   means, without the prior written permission of the publisher.

Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc., Publishers
365 Broadway
Hillsdale, New Jersey 07642




Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Relating theory and data : essays on human memory in honor of Bennet
  B. Murdock I edited by William E. Hockley, Stephan Lewandowsky.
       p.     em.
     Papers presented at a conference held at the University of
  Toronto, June 1990, in honor of Bennet B. Murdock.
     Includes bibliographical references.
     ISBN 0-8058-0732-2 (hard). - ISBN 0-8058-0733-0 (pbk.)
     1. Memory-Congresses.          I. Murdock, Bennet B. (Bronson)
  II. Hockley, William E.       III. Lewandowsky, Stephan.
  BF37l.R377 1991
  153.1'2-dc20                                              91-24174
                                                              CIP

Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1




                              Copyrighted Material
                      Contents

    PREFACE                                       ix



    PART 1: INTRODUCTION                           1

1   RELATING THEORY AND DATA: TOWARDS AN
    INTEGRATION
    Stephan Lewandowsky and William E. Hockley    3



    PART II: PERSPECTIVES ON HUMAN MEMORY        21

2   MEMORY, GROWTH, EVOLUTION, AND LATERALITY
    Michael C. Corballis                         23

3   WHY ARE FORMAL MODELS USEFUL IN
    PSYCHOLOGY?
    Douglas L. Hintzman                          39

4   MEMORY THEORY AND THE BOUNDARY
    CONDITIONS OF THE TUL VING-WISEMAN LAW
    Lars-Goran Nilsson and John M. Gardiner      57

5   BEYOND STRATEGIES: IMPLICATIONS OF MEMORY
    REPRESENTATION AND MEMORY PROCESSES FOR
    MODELS OF JUDGMENT AND DECISION MAKING
    Elke U. Weber, William M. Goldstein, and
    Jerome R. Busemeyer                          75

6   VARIETIES OF THEORETICAL PERSPECTIVES
    Robert S. Lockhart                           101



                                                   v


                       Copyrighted Material
vi   CONTENTS




     PART Ill: PROCESSES IN 1M MEDIATE MEMORY                      109

7    THE MICROSCOPE METAPHOR IN HUMAN
     MEMORY
     Robert G. Crowder and Jan Neath                               111

8    COMPARING SHORT-TERM RECALL OF ITEM,
     TEMPORAL, AND SPATIAL INFORMATION IN
     CHILDREN AND ADULTS
     Alice F. Healy, Thomas F. Cunningham,
     Antoinette T. Gesi, Robert G. Till, and Lyle E. Bourne, Jr.   127

9    ON TYPES OF ITEM CODING AND SOURCE OF
     RECALL IN SHORT-TERM MEMORY
     William K Estes                                               155

10   PHONOLOGICAL MEMORY AND SERIAL ORDER:
     A SANDWICH FOR TO DAM
     Alan D. Baddeley, Constanza Papagno, and
     Dennis Norris                                                 175

11   PEACE PIPES AROUND THE TODAM POLE:
     A PUFF FOR SHORT-TERM MEMORY
     Fergus I. M. Craik                                            195



     PART IV: PROCESSES IN RECOGNITION                             205

12   YOUR FACE LOOKS FAMILIAR BUT I CAN'T
     REMEMBER YOUR NAME: A REVIEW OF DUAL
     PROCESS THEORY
     George Mandler                                                207

13   RECOGNITION MEMORY FOR ITEM AND
     ASSOCIATIVE INFORMATION: A COMPARISON OF
     FORGETIING RATES
     William E. Hockley                                            227




                        Copyrighted Material
                                                 CONTENTS    vii


14   BIAS AND DISCRIMINATION IN CUING OF
     MEMORY: A WEIGHTED DECISIONS MODEL
     Barbara A. Dosher                                      249

15   USING ROC DATA AND PRIMING RESULTS TO TEST
     GLOBAL MEMORY MODELS
     Roger Ratcliff and Gail McKoon                         279

16   THE ANALYSIS OF RECOGNITION
     Norman J. Slamecka                                     297



     PART V: COMPONENTIAL APPROACHES TO
     MEMORY                                                 307

17   EPISODIC AND STRENGTH COMPONENTS IN
     RECOGNITION MEMORY
     MichaelS. Humphreys and John D. Bain                   309

18   COMPOSITION, DISTRIBUTION, AND
     INTERFERENCE IN MEMORY
     Richard M. Shiffrin and Kevin Murnane                  331

19   AUTOMATICITY AND MEMORY
     Gordon D. Logan                                        347

20   THE CONSTRUCTION-INTEGRATION MODEL:
     A FRAMEWORK FOR STUDYING MEMORY FOR TEXT
     Walter Kintsch and David M. Welsch                     367

21   BEN MURDOCK AND COMPLEXITY OF MEMORY
     Endel Tulving                                          387



     PART VI: DISTRIBUTED APPROACHES TO
     MEMORY                                                 397

22   COMPOSITE MEMORIES
     Janet Metcalfe                                         399


                                                             vii
                          Copyrighted Material
viii   CONTENTS


23     SERIAL RECALL OF TACHISTOSCOPIC
       LEITER STRINGS
       Douglas J. K. Mewhort and Darren Popham      425

24     GRADUAL UNLEARNING AND CATASTROPHIC
       INTERFERENCE: A COMPARISON OF DISTRIBUTED
       ARCHITECTURES
       Stephan Lewandowsky                          445

25     WHY, HAVING SO MANY NEURONS, DO WE HAVE SO
       FEW THOUGHTS?
       James A. Anderson                            477

26     RETRIEVAL MEASURES IN DISTRIBUTED
       MEMORY MODELS
       R. Patrick Goebel and Stephan Lewandowsky    509

       BIBLIOGRAPHY OF BENNET B. MURDOCK            529

       AUTHOR INDEX                                 539

       SUBJECT INDEX                                549




                       Copyrighted Material
                                   Preface

This volume evolved from a conference held at the University of Toronto in June
1990, in celebration of Bennet B. Murdock's 65th birthday, and in recognition of
his 25 years at the University of Toronto.
     In light of Ben Murdock's significant contributions to the study of human
memory, we felt a fitting birthday party should consist of a high-level scientific
meeting where current findings and theoretical views could be presented and
discussed in both formal and informal settings. To this end we invited 20 leading
researchers in the field of human memory and cognition to participate. As we
envisioned a scientifically productive meeting that would debate current theoretical
issues in a critical manner, we ensured that the list of invitees included investigators
with contrasting theoretical viewpoints. We were overwhelmed with the enthusi-
astic response we received: It is a testament to the influence of Ben's accomplish-
ments that such an esteemed group of theorists and experimentalists came from
around the world to participate in the festivities.
     The organization of this book is based largely on the sessions of the conference.
Walter Kintsch could not attend the conference but he was still able to contribute
a chapter. Robert Bjork presented a paper but could not contribute a chapter. Four
of the conference sessions were chaired by Bennet Murdock's long-time colleagues
at the University of Toronto, who have also provided the commentaries for this
collection. Thus, this volume provides both an international and a 'Toronto"
perspective on contemporary issues in cognitive psychology.
     Most readers of this volume will be familiar with Bennet Murdock's empirical
and theoretical contributions to the study and understanding of human memory. (A
bibliography is included at the end of this volume.) From first-hand experience we
know that Ben's students have appreciated his guidance and insight, and have been
inspired by his commitment, and the rigorous standards his work embodies. We
feel this collection of essays is a fitting tribute-they represent the esteem and high
regard in which Ben is held by his students, colleagues, and peers.

Acknowledgements
We are grateful for fmancial support provided by the Natural Sciences and Engi-
neering Research Council of Canada. by the University of Toronto, and by Law-
rence Erlbaum Associates. Without their assistance the conference and this volume
would not have been possible. We also gratefully acknowledge Wilfrid Laurier
University and the University of Oklahoma for their financial assistance in the
preparation of this book. All royalties from this book will be donated to the
Department of Psychology at the University of Toronto.



                                                                                      ix


                                  Copyrighted Material
x     PREFACE

     We are indebted to our colleagues Vivien Bainbridge, Francis T. Durso,
Charles Gettys, Scott D. Gronlund, and Keith Horton for their invaluable editorial
assistance. We thank Jennifer Horton for her work in preparing the subject index
and we are grateful for the extensive secretarial services perfonned by Susan Shull.
We thank Colin Macleod and Janet Metcalfe for providing the photographs of the
contributors.
     Both editors contributed equally to this project and the order of editorship was
detennined by a coin toss perfonned by Bennet B. Murdock at the meeting of the
Psychonomic Society, November 18, 1990, in New Orleans.

                                                                William E. Hockley
                                                             Stephan Lewandowsky




                             Copyrighted Material
         Participants of
    Relating Theory and Data:

     Conference in Honor of
Bennet B. Murdock's 65th Birthday




            Copyrighted Material
Participants of Relating Theory and Data:

 1. MichaelS. Humphreys            13 . Fergus I. M. Craik
 2. R. Patrick Goebel              14. Robert A. Bjork
 3. Elke U. Weber                  15. Robert S. Lockhart
 4. Bennet B. Murdock              16. Stephan Lewandowsky
 5. Robert G. Crowder              17. Janet Metcalfe
 6. Alice F. Healy                 18. Douglas L. Hintzman
 7. Gail McKoon                    19. Michael C. Corballis
 8. Barbara A . Dosher             20. Roger Ratcliff
 9. Norman J. Slamecka             21. Richard M. Shiffrin
10. Douglas J. K. Mewhort          22. Gordon D. Logan
11. George Mandler                 23. James A. Anderson
12. Endel Tulving                  24. William E. Hockley
                   25. Lars-Goran Nilsson




                    Copyrighted Material
~
~
~
CD
0..

~
CD
~




      Bennet B. Murdock   Composite photograph of all contributors to Relating Theory and
                          Data (see chapter 22 for an explanation of the technique).
Copyrighted Material
I      INTRODUCTION




    Copyrighted Material
Copyrighted Material
                     1
                                 Relating Theory and
                                 Data: Towards an
                                 Integration



Stephan Lewandowsky
University of Oklahoma


William E. Hockley
Wilfrid Laurier University



                                INTRODUCTION
At the time of its publication in 1974, Human Memory: Theory and Data was hailed
as a "classic reference that captures the last 18 years' research" and "sure to be a
major contribution," to cite two enthusiastic endorsements from the book' s jacket
cover. In hindsight, these expectations were proven correct; Murdock's (1974)
book has indeed become a classic and provided a major contribution towards the
understanding of human memory.
     The book was novel in interesting ways: It was organized not by the temporal
partitioning of memory popular at the time and characteristic of its predecessors,
but rather according to the different types of infonnation represented in memory.
For each type of infonnation, in tum, presentation was separated between a theory
chapter on one hand and a data chapter on the other.

Item, Associative, and Serial Order Information
Murdock's (1974) distinction between three fundamental types of infonnation in
memory is relevant to every-day retrieval tasks. We can recognize Liz Taylor in a
photograph (item infonnation); using that same photograph we can retrieve the fact
that she was married to Richard Burton (associative infonnation); and we may also
recall that others preceded and followed Burton (serial order infonnation). The
example also illustrates Murdock's view that item, associative, and serial order
infonnation represent increasing degrees of complexity of the underlying proc-



                                                                                  3


                                Copyrighted Material
4     LEWANDOWSKY AND HOCKLEY

esses. Item information is most basic, retrieval of associative information is more
difficult, and recalling the order of events is more difficult still. We easily recognize
Liz Taylor on a photograph, we may be able to recall that she was twice married
to Richard Burton, once to Eddie Fisher, and once to a senator whose name escapes
us, but we cannot remember the order of these relationships.
     Originally, the distinction between different types of information was based
on the pre-theoretical assumption that different processes could underlie encoding,
storage, and retrieval of item, associative, and serial order information. Murdock
(1982, 1983) developed this theoretical distinction more formally in his Theory of
Distributed Associative Memory (fODAM). Recent research has strongly sup-
ported the validity of Murdock's distinction (e.g., Bain & Humphreys, 1988;
Gronlund & Ratcliff, 1989; Humphreys, 1976; Lewandowsky & Murdock, 1989a;
Murdock & Hockley, 1989a).
     The distinction between item, associative and serial order information is also
amply represented in the present volume. For example, Dosher, and Humphreys
and Bain consider the contributions of item and associative information in recog-
nition decisions. The relationship between item and associative or contextual
information is also reflected in Mandler's review of dual process theory, and in
Nilsson and Gardiner's examination of the relationship between recall and recog-
nition memory. The representation and retrieval of item and serial order information
in short-term memory recall tasks is examined in the chapters by Baddeley,
Papagno, and Norris, and Crowder and Neath, and Estes. Mewhort and Popham
use TO DAM to provide an account of serial recall of tachistoscopic letter strings,
and Healy, Cunningham, Gesi, Till, and Bourne compare recall of item, temporal
and spatial information in both children and adults.

Relationships Between Theory and Data
Murdock's Theory and Data clearly spelled out biases and pretheoretical consid-
erations at the beginning. Perhaps the most consequential of these was the clear
endorsement of explicit models, either stated mathematically or implemented in a
computer simulation. This was in preference to the verbal models that predomi-
nated at the time, which Murdock considered to be "vague, imprecise, and difficult
to refute" (p. 6). In his view the predictions of a theory or model "seldom become
clear until the model is developed explicitly" (p. 6). Ratcliff and McKoon (this
volume) present an important illustration of this view in their comparison of the
predictions for ROC data of the current global memory models.
     For someone with this theoretical conviction, the exposition of major develop-
ments in the field ideally would have integrated theory and data, for describing one
without the other is incomplete and inadequate. However, at the time this proved
impossible because contemporary theories could not embrace the large existing
data base. Consequently, Murdock discussed theories separate from the relevant
data, although not without qualms: 'To segregate theory and data is not a very
satisfactory procedure. They should be thoroughly and carefully interrelated.
However we are not quite ready for that On the one hand, none of the theories we




                               Copyrighted Material
                                           1. TOWARDS AN INTEGRATION               5

now have explain in any depth and with great precision even an appreciable fraction
of the relevant data. On the other hand, to consider data alone would be banen and
uninteresting" (p. ix).
     Fortunately, this is no longer the case, in no small part due to Ben Murdock's
development of a comprehensive theoretical framework for human memory
(I'ODAM: Murdock, 1982; 1983). The time has now come that we can begin to
present a more coherent picture that interrelates theory and data. Whereas in 1974
theories were incomplete and relatively few in number, today numerous theories
compete to offer a most comprehensive account of a wide range of data.
     In this chapter, we explore developments since 1974. Naturally, given the
continuing explosion of research in cognitive psychology, any such attempt must
be highly selective. This selectivity necessarily reflects our biases, which, like
Murdock, we wish to state at the outset. First and foremost, and not unexpectedly
for two graduates of the Murdock laboratocy, we endorse the pivotal role of
quantitative and explicit modeling in human memory. The reader is referred to
Hintz man's chapter for an extensive and convincing argument for the general utility
of models in memory and cognition. For this chapter, we emphasize developments
within a distributed perspective on human memocy, although we readily acknowl-
edge that many other approaches are equally valuable, as some of the following
chapters will undoubtedly make clear. And we make liberal references to our own
work only because much of it is connected to the person we honor in this festschrift.
     In the following, we illustrate the present-day relationship between theory and
data by discussing three themes which, we believe, are representative of the
enormous progress enjoyed by cognitive psychology during recent years. These
themes follow Murdock's taxonomy of item, associative, and serial order informa-
tion. In the case of item information, new data have been of principal importance
in constraining and guiding the construction and development of new theory. By
way of contrast, for serial order information the challenge has been to develop new
theory to account for the existing data base. Associative information, finally,
presents a case in which data constrained theory as much as theory generated new
data.

            ITEM RECOGNITION: ABANDONING TI-lE SEARCH
Since Sternberg's (1966) pioneering study, the assumption that the retrieval of item
information consists of a serial search process, or at least includes a serial search
component (e.g., Atkinson & Juola, 1973, 1974; Atkinson, Herrmann, & Wescourt,
1974), has had a powerful influence on models of item recognition. Murdock
(1974) proposed the conveyor-belt model to account for the retrieval of item
information in the venerable study-test paradigm. This metaphorically-named
serial search model was based on the fact that the latency of recognition decisions
is a linear function of study-test lag (the number of events that intervene between
study and test) and output position.
      While the assumption of a serial search process for item recognition was
consistent with Sternberg's analysis of retrieval in short-term memory, the slope of
the linear functions used to index the search rate are remarkably different in
Sternberg's procedure and in the study-test paradigm. Murdock and Anderson



                                Copyrighted Material
6     LEWANDOWSKY AND HOCKLEY

(1975) tried to bridge this gap by invoking the notion of functional set-size. They
showed that the conveyor-belt model could account for both subspan and supraspan
set-size effects and confidence judgments. Murdock, Hockley, and Muter (1977)
also tried to account for the effects of item repetition within this framework.
     Critical evaluation of serial search prompted a variety of empirical tests (e.g.,
Baddeley & Ecob, 1973; Burrows & Okada, 1971; Corballis, 1967; Hockley, 1984;
Hockley & Corballis, 1982; Okada & Burrows, 1978; Shiffrin & Schneider, 1977),
alternative interpretations (e.g., Atkinson, Holmgren & Juola, 1969; Burrows &
Okada, 1975; Checkosky, 1971; Corballis & Miller, 1973; Nickerson, 1972; Pike,
Dalgleish, & Wright, 1977; Ratcliff, 1978; Theios, Smith, Haviland, Traupman, &
Moy, 1973), considerable debate (e.g., Corballis, 1986; Ryan, 1983; Shiffrin &
Schneider, 1984; Sternberg, 1975), and new findings and issues (e.g., Corballis,
1986; Corballis, Murray, & Connolly, 1989; Elkind & Corballis, 1986).
     Murdock abandoned the conveyor-belt model for a number of reasons. For
one, the hypothesized scanning process could not account for the pattern of results
obtained in the continuous recognition paradigm (Hockley, 1982; Murdock, 1980).
In addition, the changes in the shape of the underlying response latency distribu-
tions as a function of set-size or test lag cannot be easily reconciled with a simple
serial comparison process (Hockley, 1984; Hockley & Corballis, 1982; Ratcliff &
Murdock, 1976). Finally, the development of a distributed memory system with its
intuitively appealing properties obviated the need for any type of search process.
     The increasing sophistication of the chronometric approach to the study of
item recognition has led to a variety of new insights into the underlying processes
and has provided the impetus for a number of theoretical developments. Whereas
serial search models were based on the observed changes of mean response latency,
a more detailed examination of the behavior of the response latency distributions
(Ratcliff & Murdock, 1976) provided the empirical basis for Ratcliff's (1978)
parallel resonance retrieval theory of item recognition. While search models could
account for changes in mean latency in a given task, Ratcliff's model offered a far
more comprehensive description of both response time and accuracy across a wide
range of recognition paradigms.
      The empirical analysis of latency distributions popularized by Ratcliff and
Murdock provided a powerful tool to evaluate theoretical descriptions of perform-
ance and to compare the nature of processes between different cognitive tasks.
Once processes have been specified, and assumptions made about their charac-
teristics, the predicted shape of the response latency distribution is constrained, and
comparison with the data can provide a powerful test of the model.
      Consider, for example, Hockley's (1984) analysis of response distributions for
three separate tasks: Item recognition, visual search, and judgments of item
recency. For item recognition in the Sternberg paradigm, the linear increase of mean
response time as a function of set-size is often interpreted to reflect a serial search
component, which mathematically would be expected to increase the leading edge
component of the latency distribution. However, in Hockley's data, the increased
 mean response latency was largely due to an increase in the positive skewness of
 the latency distributions with only a modest increase in the leading edge of the
distributions. In other words, while the fastest responses changed very little, the




                              Copyrighted Material
                                            1. TOWARDS AN INTEGRATION               7

slower responses became progressively slower as set-size increased This is diffi-
cult to reconcile with any simple version of a serial search model. In contrast, for
visual search Hockley (1984) found the linear increase in response time as a
function of the size of the search set to be largely an increase in the leading edge
of the distributions. This finding is more consistent with a controlled search process
(cf. Shiffrin & Schneider, 1977) in which each additional comparison adds to the
total search time. In the recency judgment task, finally, subjects were required to
determine the order of items from a short study list and mean response time was a
linear function of the serial position of the most recent item. The changes in the
underlying latency distributions were entirely consistent with a backward serial
search process (cf. Hacker, 1980; Muter, 1979).
     These results, when considered together, demonstrate that latency distributions
vary in systematic and interesting ways in different tasks. Clearly, any theoretical
description of performance in these tasks must be able to provide a reasonable
account of these results.

TODAM and Item Recognition
In TODAM, the search notion has been abandoned completely and is replaced by
a composite memory vector (Murdock, 1982). In a recognition test, the vector
representing the probe is compared to the memory vectoc. The resulting dot product
represents the degree to which information in the probe matches information in
memory and serves as the basis for judgments of familiarity or item recognition.
In this regard TO DAM is similar to the theoretical interpretations of item recogni-
tion advanced by Gillund and Shiffrin's (1984) SAM model, Hintzman's (1984)
MINERVA 2 model, CHARM (Eich, 1982), and the Matrix model (e.g., Hum-
phreys, Bain, & Pike, 1989). While these models differ greatly with respect to the
processes assumed to underlie encoding, storage, and retrieval of item information,
all share the common assumption that recognition decisions are based on the
summed output of a matching process.
     The Memory Interrogation Model (Hockley & Murdock, 1987) was developed
to provide a description of the decision process that is necessary to evaluate the dot
product or assess item familiarity. This model was shown to provide a good fit not
only to mean latency and accuracy, but also to the observed response latency
distributions in the major paradigms used to study recognition memory. The
Memory Interrogation Model has recently been extended to provide an account of
absolute judgments of item frequency (Hockley, in press; Murdock & Hockley,
1989b).
     This decision model also offers an alternative to Ratcliff's (1978) resonance
theory. One critical difference between these models concerns the characterization
of the temporal dynamics that result in the observed changes in the latency
distributions as a function of such manipulations as set size or test lag. These
changes occur as a result of the parallel comparison or diffusion process in
Ratcliff's model, whereas the Memory Interrogation Model assumes that these
changes are a result of the operation of the decision system. In the former view
)nformation is assumed to accrue during retrieval while in the latter framework




                                 Copyrighted Material
8     LEWANDOWSKY AND HOCKLEY

there is no accumulation of information but rather an assessment of item familiarity
over time. The advantages and disadvantages of each model are discussed in greater
detail in Gronlund and Ratcliff (in press) and Hockley and Murdock (1991).

Conclusion
The recent history of research on recognition memory provides a good example of
how extensive and precise research can lead to the development of new theoretical
interpretations. The development of such powerful models as Ratcliff's (1978)
resonance retrieval theory and Murdock's (1982) TODAM were in large part a
result of exploring alternatives to serial-search based models of item recognition.
     More recent empirical developments concern the nature of the time course of
the retrieval operations, revealed by studies of speed-accuracy trndeoffs using
variants of the response signal method (e.g., Dosher, 1988; Dosher, McElree,
Hood, & Rosedale, 1989; Gronlund & Ratcliff, 1989; Ratcliff, 1988). Gronlund
and Ratcliff (1989), for example, found that discriminations based on item recog-
nition precede discriminations requiring associative information, indicating that
the retrieval of these two types of information have different time courses. These
investigators argue that the current global models of memory, because they have
not incorporated retrieval dynamics as an essential component of their framework,
cannot easily account for such time-course data. They further speculate that time-
course data provide "a set of phenomena with which the next generation of theories
must deal" (p. 857).
     The nature of the time course of retrieval of information and the "list strength
effect" recently reported by Ratcliff, Clark, and Shiffrin (1990), and Shiffrin,
Ratcliff, and Clark (1990), provide the most recent empirical tests of the current
global matching models of recognition memory. The chapters in this volume by
Shiffiin and Murnane, concerning the list strength effect, and by Ratcliff and
McKoon, concerning the predictions of global models for the variances of the
underlying distributions derived from ROC data, may therefore tum out to be
harbingers of empirical and theoretical progress to come.

          SERIAL ORDER INFORMATION: CHAINING REVISITED

How does seriation between list items occur? How do we remember that Lyndon
Johnson was president prior to Richard Nixon, or that the section on item informa-
tion preceded serial order information in this chapter? Ebbinghaus (1913) proposed
the simple and elegant view that in these instances items or events are connected
by pairwise associations, much like beads on a chain, and that retrieval proceeds
in a given order from one end of the chain to the other. Unfortunately, a well-known
property of chains is that their total strength cannot exceed that of the weakest
link-thus, if the retrieval chain is interrupted because an item is forgotten, none
of the following information should be retrievable. This, of course, is a rather
unreasonable prediction, falsified by literally hundreds of studies that show con-
sistent serial position effects; that is, elevated recall probabilities for terminal items
at both beginning and ending of a list.




                              Copyrighted Material
                                           1. TOWARDS AN INTEGRATION               9

      In Theory and Data Murdock therefore chose a nesting model as the most
likely candidate for successful modeling of serial order effects. This model assumes
that no more than two items can be associated together, but that one of those two
can be a "coding element" that, in tum, tags a constituent association. A serial list
is therefore encoded in a binary tree structure that, at recall, needs to be unpacked
step-by-step. The model is capable of predicting primacy and recency by postulat-
ing a tradeoff between two monotonic processes, decay of an item in the response
buffer vs. errors during unpacking. To demonstrate the general validity of the
model, Murdock (1974, p. 296) fit prototypical serial position data obtained with
auditory and visual presentation. The fit was good but required nine free parame-
ters, a fairly large number by any standards. Rather than being unique to the nesting
model, large numbers of free parameters were symptomatic also of other attempts
to model relatively simple serial order effects. Shiffrin and Cook (1978), for
example, proposed a relational model-which separated item and serial order
information-that also required some five to ten free parameters. Possibly because
of these apparent difficulties facing theoretical developments, interest in serial
order effects waned for many years, with the notable exception of activity in the
laboratories of William Estes and Alice Healy (see also their chapters in this
volume).

TODAM and Chaining
The first event to foreshadow a reawakening of interest in seriation was the
publication of a version of TODAM specifically designed to address serial order
phenomena (Murdock, 1983). Somewhat unexpectedly, this version of TO DAM
relied on pairwise chaining between neighboring words on the list, similar to
Ebbinghaus' original proposal in principle, and different only because of the
distributed nature of the memory representation in TODAM. It is noteworthy to
report what Murdock had to say about chaining in 1974: "The disadvantage is that
it is wrong. Linear chains mediated by linked associations just won't do" (p. 292).
Why, then , the sudden return to pairwise chaining of associations?
      A partial answer was provided by Lewandowsky and Murdock (1989a), who
showed that TO DAM could predict a variety of findings in serial order memory,
ranging from recall of short lists, and build-up and release from proactive interfer-
ence, to subtle effects of variables such as word frequency or presentation modality.
In all cases, even when strong recency was present, the simple chaining notion in
TODAM fit the data quite well. The secret to this success lies in the distributed
representational assumptions inherent in TODAM: Upon cuing with an item, an
approximation to the other member of the original association is retrieved, which
must then be "deblurred" into an overt response. An item is "forgotten" if the
approximation cannot be deblurred into the correct overt response. However, even
when deblurring fails, the original approximation is still available for use as a cue
for the next item in the chain. Thus, for the list ABC DE, even though deblurring
of item C may be unsuccessful, thus producing an omission error, the subsequent
itemsD and E are still potentially accessible by cuing with the blurry approximation
to C. Thus, Murdock and Lewandowsky were able to conclude "not that chaining
is wrong, but that the models and theories that used chaining [previously] were



                                Copyrighted Material
10     LEWANDOWSKY AND HOCKLEY

inadequate or incomplete" (1986, p. 93). In this volume, Baddeley and his col-
leagues present more applications of TO DAM to serial recall, and Mewhort and
Popham extend the chaining mechanism to a different area of inquiry. Nonetheless,
a simple chaining notion is insufficient to account for more complex phenomena
such as chunking (cf. Murdock, in press).

Conclusion
The recent history of serial order information differs from that of item information
in some interesting ways. We have seen very little in the way of new data on
seriation since the 1970s (but see Crowder and Neath, Estes, and Healy et al. in this
volume). By comparison, work on item recognition has been indeed bountiful
during the past two decades. Nonetheless, there has been progress in serial order
memory, but the engine of this progress was mainly in the theoretical domain; and,
most appropriate for a review in this festschrift, it was an engine from the Murdock
shop, TO DAM, that propelled us towards improved understanding of seriation.
      The question arises as to the value of purported theoretical advances, if they
remain limited to an account of existing data, however elegant that account may
be. Surely, we ought to drive forward from our new plateau of theoretical under-
standing, by making predictions and thus generating new and interesting data. As
an illustration, consider one clear prediction made by TO DAM which we can sketch
even though data collection is in progress (Shu-Chen Li is conducting this study at
the University of Oklahoma).
      There are well-known differences in the shape of the serial position curve for
forward and backward serial recall. Whereas extensive primacy and some recency
(under visual presentation conditions) are expected for forward recall, much steeper
recency combines with very little primacy for the backward case. TO DAM captures
 this pattern without difficulty (Lewandowsky & Murdock, 1989a, p. 46). Experi-
mental techniques exist that reduce the extent of primacy in forward recall (e.g.,
 Neath & Crowder, 1990), for example by interspersing distractor activity between
 individual items on the list. For short lists, in the order of four or five items, these
 manipulations can produce forward serial position curves that range from com-
 pletely flat (at nearly pertect level of pertormance) to highly bow-shaped with
extensive primacy. Crowder and Neath's chapter in this volume presents the
 technique in greater detail. The question, then, concerns what one would expect if
 recall direction is reversed for both flat and bow-shaped serial position curves.
      According to TO DAM, the backward serial position curves are expected to be
 nearly identical, regardless of the extent of primacy during forward recall under
 the same conditions. That is, a dissociation is expected, such that any variable
 affecting forward primacy should have no-or very little-effect on backward
 recall. In TO DAM different processes cause serial position effects in forward and
 backward recall. Specifically, in forward recall, the weighting parameter for serial
 order information decreases across list position, reflecting a presumed shift in
 attention, and thus giving rise to primacy (recency is another matter and irrelevant
 here). For backward recall, the principal force shaping the serial position curve is
 the extent of output interference or lag. Consider backward recall of the list
 ABC D: the first item reported would beD, followed by C, B, and A. The lag, or



                               Copyrighted Material
                                          1. TOWARDS AN INTEGRATION               11
number of items intervening, between encoding and recall forD would be zero,
for Cit would be two, forB four, and so on. This increase in lag generates the steep
recency observed in the data, and far outweighs any effects the remaining parame-
ters in TODAM might have. During forward recall, in contrast, Jag remains
constant-exactly the same number of items intervene between encoding and
retrieval for A, B, C, and D---thus enabling the weighting parameter to modify
performance. It follows that if forward primacy is reduced or eliminated, through
the appropriate change in the behavior of the weighting parameter, this should not
affect backward recall which is still encumbered with growing output interference.
     Stating predictions publicly, before the data have been collected, is a risky
business; but it seems more than appropriate here, where we attempt to show how
theory and data interacted during the past decades, and what their joint future might
possibly hold. In the case of serial order information, theory has until recently
lagged behind existing data, which perhaps explains the scarcity of empirical
research, and it is only now that novel predictions are being made for future
research.

    ASSOCIATIVE INFORMATION: FROM STATES TO PROCESSES
Like most theorists at the time, Murdock subscribed to a Markov-type model for
associative information. According to the fluctuation model (Murdock, 1967, 1970,
1972) an association is either available or unavailable and can only be recalled
when it is in the available state. Associations are thought to change states, either
from available to unavailable or vice versa, through presentation of additional
interfering material. This simple model could account for the steep but limited
recency commonly found with paired associates, and the fact that performance
levels off very quickly and reaches a steady asymptote after a few interfering
associations, with no further forgetting. A similar but even more striking lack of
forgetting for the case of associative recognition is reported by Hockley in this
volume. Finally, the fluctuation model also correctly predicted the slope of the
function relating list length to number of pairs recalled.
     Nonetheless, as Murdock also noted (1974, p. 290), the fluctuation model
could not provide an adequate account of well-known effects such as imagery and
mediation. Like all Markov models it also suffered from being merely descriptive,
albeit at a quantitative level, as opposed to explanat<X)'. Interest in Markov models
declined when more process-oriented views of memory became fashionable.
     Together with new views of memory, for example those advanced by
Fergus I. M. Craik, RobertS. Lockhart, and Endel Tulving, the 1970s also saw a
shift towards different experimental questions. Of particular interest here are those
asked by Michael S. Humphreys in a series of studies on the interplay between
associative information and item recognition (Humphreys, 1976, 1978). Subjects
had to make item recognition decisions involving previously studied pairs. Recog-
nition was superior for test pairs whose members were previously studied together
than for new arrangements of studied words or for pairs that included new items.
This implied that associative information affected recognition decisions that, on a
logical basis, could have been completely item-predicated. Humphreys' data, and
later work by Clark and Shiffrin (1987), Humphreys and Bain (1983), Humphreys,



                                 Copyrighted Material
12     LEWANDOWSKY AND HOCKLEY

Pike, Bain, and Tehan (1989), Mensink and Raaijmakers (1988) and others,
underscored the need to devise models that were capable of handling both item and
associative effects under one umbrella.
     Perhaps the first model of this type was Murdock's TODAM. The initial
formulation (Murdock, 1982) was capable of predicting performance in a variety
of single-trial paradigms involving both item and associative information. How-
ever, it was only in a recent paper by Lewandowsky and Murdock (1989b) that
TO DAM was extended to multi-trial experiments involving associative learning.

TODAM and Associative Learning
Lewandowsky and Murdock (1989b) showed that TODAM can handle a variety
of classic interference and transfer paradigms quite gracefully. In particular, the
A-B/A-C paradigm, notorious for the difficulties it poses to modelers, was ex-
plained with only a few free parameters. Similarly, variants of this basic retroactive
interference (RI) paradigm also did not present undue problems for TODAM:
A-B/A-B' transfer was substantial, as in the behavioral data, and TODAM made
qualitatively correct predictions concerning the number of intrusions as a function
of RI. Details of the Lewandowsky and Murdock application, and its implications
for other distributed memory models are reviewed by Lewandowsky in this
volume.
     While applying TO DAM to associative learning, the forgetting parameter in
the model was consistently estimated to be very close to unity; that is, close to a
value at which no forgetting would be predicted (Murdock & Hockley, 1989a). This
puzzling finding engendered a systematic comparison of forgetting rates for items
and associations within the same lists. The surprising result across a number of
studies was the virtual absence of further forgetting of associations, when tested
by recognition, after two intervening pairs (Hockley, this volume). Although this
aspect of the data confirms the initial parameter estimate in TO DAM, the theory
may have greater difficulty accounting for the simultaneous rather steep forgetting
of item information. At present, Hockley's data pose an intriguing puzzle for most
models of memory.

Conclusion
A major historical trend has influenced research on associative information since
the 1974 publication date of Theory and Data. These years witnessed the decline
of the verbal learning zeitgeist that so predominated the field for several decades.
The leading role was taken over by a more process-oriented view of cognition that
severed the remaining ties to the behaviorist heritage. This trend led to the demise
of the once-popular Markov models without the appearance of new and incompat-
ible data, or indeed, without the immediate appearance of new and competing
models. It was only during the past five years that theories have again emerged that
find it worthwhile to return to the long-established and comprehensive data base
on associative learning. And it was even more recently, that these theories generated
more research in this venerable area of human cognition. The chapters in this




                             Copyrighted Material
                                         1. TOWARDS AN INTEGRATION              13

volume by Dosher, Humphreys and Bain, and Ratcliff and McKoon concerning
compound cues and priming effects in item and associative recognition memory
developed from the perspective of global memory models represent such research.

               PROGRESS: RELATING lliEORY AND DATA
We fmd it remarkable how much Murdock's (1974) distinction between different
types of information has proved fruitful. Although varying amounts of research
activity have been devoted to the different types of information, with item and
associative information receiving more attention than serial order phenomena.
progress has undoubtedly been made in all three areas. In particular, theories
matured from being largely verbal formulations or quantitative descriptions of
relationships between variables, to more explicit accounts of the underlying proc-
esses.
     One measure of progress in the field is the extent to which theories and data
have become interrelated. Whereas Murdock bemoaned the lack of integration
in 1974, in present-day cognitive psychology the inte1play between theory and data
has become more embracive. Interestingly, this development has not proceeded
along similar paths for each type of information, thus confmning that there are
many different avenues along which progress can flow.
      In our opinion, research on item recognition represents a case in which data
promoted theory construction. Up until 1974, experiments had divulged only a
fraction of the insights into recognition memory that have since been obtained with
more rigorous methodology and increased sophistication in data analysis, such as
the measurement of temporal dynamics. To borrow the illuminating analogy
proposed by Crowder and Neath in this volume, we have come closer to stepping
from optical to electron microscopy in human memory. In the same way that
biological or physical theories had to be modified when more powerful micro-
scopes revealed the presence of yet another level of complexity, the increased
precision of experimental methodology has also propelled and constrained theories
of item recognition.
      At the opposite extreme, theoretical advances in the analysis of memory for
serial order have occurred without much in the way of new or critical data. The
challenge for theory has always been tied to a vast and stable data base, largely
unchanged since 1974, and progress occurred without enhanced magnification of
the empirical microscope. It was the distributed representational assumptions of
TODAM, which arose from more basic considerations of how memory might work,
that led to a more successful and intriguing reformulation of the classic chaining
view.
      Advances in the understanding of associative information fall somewhere in
between the foregoing two extremes. On the one hand, a variety of models have
been successfully applied to existing data, among them the classic transfer para-
digms. On the other hand, recent empirical work will likely provide additional
constraints for further modeling. Consider Hockley's chapter in this volume: His
research was motivated by specific theoretical considerations, but his unexpected
results are not easily reconcilable with existing models.




                                Copyrighted Material
14     LEWANDOWSKY AND HOCKLEY


Conclusion
It is by no means a straightforward task to evaluate progress in a field as diverse
as cognitive psychology. This is, in no small measure, due to a lack of consensus
on what constitutes progress (cf. Tulving, 1979). As a discipline we have come a
long way from the first attempts to explore empirical relationships, but we are still
very far from providing definitive answers to any but the most basic questions that
our work addresses. Since 1974 there have been enormous advances in theoretical
development and in empirical tests of these developments. But how far have we
come and how far have we to go?
      In this chapter we have argued that one measure of progress is the degree to
which data and theory are interrelated, and we have attempted to show that such
progress has occurred as a consequence of both empirical and theoretical develop-
ments and as a result of their interaction. This measure of progress is a relative or
reflective one, not an absolute measure; it allows us to assess the advances that
have been made compared to past accomplishments but it does not indicate how
far we have yet to go. By this measure we can appreciate that there have been
substantial gains since 1974, but we can only speculate about how much more is
to come.

Much More
This chapter focused on three types of information, which together represent only
a tiny subset of all phenomena commonly subsumed under the heading "human
memory" or "cognition." Although Bennet Murdock's contribution focused on
these three areas, it certainly has not been limited to them alone, as is attested by
the wide range of topics brought together in this festschrift: Michael Corballis
provides us with an evolutionary perspective on memory; Elke Weber and her
colleagues extend the scope of TODAM to decision making processes; Walter
Kintsch and David Welsch present a construction-integration model of memory for
text; Gordon Logan provides a memory-based view of automaticity and skilled
performance; James Anderson describes issues related to the architecture of mem-
ory representations; and Janet Metcalfe presents us with a striking visual demon-
stration of composite memories. By contributing their varied interests and back-
grounds to this festschrift, these authors reveal how truly broad the appeal is of
Bennet B. Murdock's work-to all concerned with Theory and Data in Human
Memory.

                            ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Order of authorship of this chapter counterbalances the order of editorship of this
volume, which in tum was determined by monte carlo means. The authors grate-
fully acknowledge critical readings of this chapter by J. Vivien Bainbridge, Keith
Horton, and Bennet B. Murdock.




                             Copyrighted Material
                                              1. TOWARDS AN INTEGRATION                  15


                                     REFERENCES
Atkinson, R. C., Herrmann, D. J., & Wescourt, K. T. (1974). Search processes in recognition
    memocy. In R. L. Sol so (Ed.), Theories in cognitive psychology: The Loyola Symposium
    (pp. 101-146). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Atkinson, R. C., Holmgren, J. E., & Juola, J. F. (1969). Processing time as influenced by
     number of items in a visual display. Perception &: Psychophysics, 6, 321-326.

Atkinson, R. C., & Juola, J. F. (1973). Factors influencing speed and accuracy of word
    recognition. InS. Kornblum (Ed.),Attention and performance: IV (pp. 583-612). New
     York: Academic Press.

Atkinson, R. C., & Juola, J. F. (1974 ). Search and decision processes in recognition memory.
    In D. H. Krantz, R. C. Atkinson, & R. D. Luce (Eds.), Contemporary developments in
    mathematical psychology (Volume 1. Learning, memory and thinking) (pp. 243-293).
    San Francisco: Freeman.

Baddeley, A. D., & Ecob, J. R. (1973). Reaction time and short-term memory: Implications
    of repetition effects for the high-speed exhaustive scan hypothesis. Quarterly Journal
    of Experimental Psychology, 25,229-240.

Bain, J.D., & Humphreys, M. S. (1988). Relational context: Independent cues, meanings or
     configurations? In G. M. Davies & D. M. Thomson (Eds.), Memory in context: Context
     in memory (pp. 97 -137), London: Wiley.

Burrows, D., & Okada, R. (1971). Serial position effects in high-speed memory search.
    Perception &: Psychophysics, 10, 305-308.

Burrows, D., & Okada, R. (1975). Memory retrieval from long and short lists. Science, 188,
    1031-1033.

Checkosky, S. F. (1971). Speeded classification of multidimensional stimuli. Journal of
    Experimental Psychology, 87,383-388.

Clark, S. E., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1987). Recognition of multiple probes. Memory &: Cognition,
     15,367-378.

Corballis, M. C. (1967). Serial order in recognition and recall. Journal of Experimental
    Psychology, 74, 113-114.

Corballis, M. C. (1986). Memory scanning: Can subjects scan two sets at once? Psychologi-
    cal Review, 93, 113-114.

Corballis, M. C., & Miller, A. (1973). Scanning and decision processes in recognition
    memocy. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 98, 379-386.

Corballis, M. C., Murray, J. E., & Connolly, G. (1989). Memory scanning: Are fued and
    varied sets scanned concurrently or successively? Journal ofExperimental Psychology:
    Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 15, 1175-1184.

Dosher, B. A. (1988). Retrieval dynamics of item and associative information. Unpublished
    manuscript.




                                     Copyrighted Material
16      LEWANDOWSKY AND HOCKLEY

Dosher, B. A., McElree, R, Hood, M., & Rosedale, G. (1989). Retrieval dynamics of priming
    in recognition memory: Bias and discrimination analysis. Journal of Experimental
    Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,15, 868-886.

Ebbinghaus, H. (1913). Memory: A contribution to experimental psychology. New York:
    Columbia University, Teachers College.

Eich, J.M. (1982). A composite holographic associative recall model. Psychological Review,
     89,627-661.

Elkind, G., & Corballis, M. C. (1986). Scanning two memorized lists. Memory & Cognition,
     14,253-264.

Gillund, G., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1984). A retrieval model for both recognition and recall.
     Psychological Review, 91,1-61.

Gronlund, S. D., & Ratcliff, R. (1989). Tune course of item and associative information:
    hnplications for global memory models. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learn-
    ing, Memory, and Cognition,15, 846-858.

Gronlund, S.D., & Ratcliff, R. (in press). Analysis of the Hockley and Murdock decision
    model. Journal of Mathematical Psychology.

Hacker, M. J. (1980). Speed and accuracy of recency judgments for events in short-term
    memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 6,
    651-675.

Hintzman, D. L. (1984). MINERVA 2: A simulation model of human memory. Behavior
    Research Methods,/nstruments, and Computers,16, 96-101.

Hockley, W. E. (1982). Retrieval processes in continuous recognition. Journal of Experi-
    mental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 8, 497-512.

Hockley, W. E. (1984). Analysis of response time distributions in the study of cognitive
    processes. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
    10, 598-615.

Hockley, W. E. (in press). Interrogating memory: A decision model for recognition and
    judgment of frequency. lnM. C. Corballis, K. G. White, & W. Abraham (Eds.),Memory
    mechanisms: A tribute to G.V. Goddard. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Hockley, W. E., & Corballis, M. C. (1982). Tests of serial scanning in item recognition.
    Canadian Journal of Psychology, 36, 189-212.

Hockley, W. E., & Murdock, B. B. (1987). A decision model for accuracy and response
    latency in recognition latency. Psychological Review, 94, 341-358.

Hockley, W. E., & Murdock, B. B. (1991). Further comparisons of the Hockley-Murdock
    and Ratcliff models: A reply to Gronlund and Ratcliff. Manuscript submitted for
    publication.

Humphreys, M. S. (1976). Relational information and the context effect in recognition
   memory. Memory & Cognition, 4, 221-232.




                              Copyrighted Material
                                              1. TOWARDS AN INTEGRATION                  17


Hwnphreys, M.S. (1978). Item and relational information: A case for context independent
   retrieval. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 17, 175-187.

Hwnphreys, M. S., & Bain, J. D. (1983). Recognition memory: A cue and information
   analysis. Memory & Cognition, 11, 583-600.

Hwnphreys, M.S., Bain, J.D., & Pike, R. (1989). Different ways to cue a coherent memory
   system: A theory for episodic, semantic, and procedural tasks. Psychological Review,
   96, 208-233.

Hwnphreys, M.S., Pike, R., Bain, J.D., & Tehan, G. (1989). Global matching: A comparison
   of the SAM, Minerva ll, Matrix and TODAM models. Journal of Mathematical
   Psychology, 33,36-67.

Lewandowsky, S., & Murdock, B. B. (1989a). Memory for serial order. Psychological
   Review, 96,25-57.

Lewandowsky, S., & Murdock, B. B. (1989b). A distributed memory model for associative
    learning. In D. Vickers & P. L. Smith (Eds.), Human information processing: Measures,
    mechanisms, and models (pp. 381-394). Amsterdam: North-Holland

Mensink, G., & Raaijmakers, J. G. W. (1988). A model for interference and forgetting.
    Psychological Review, 95, 434-455.

Murdock, B. B. (1967). An analysis of the recognition process. In C. N. Cofer & B. S.
    Musgrave (Eds.), Verbal behavior and learning (pp. 10-22). New York: McGraw-Hill.

Murdock, B. B. (1970). Short-termmemory for associations. In D. A. Norman (Ed.),Models
    of human memory (pp. 285-304). New York: Academic Press.

Murdock, B. B. (1972). Short-term memory. In G. H. Bower (Ed.), The psychology of
    learning and motivation: Advances in research and theory, Vol. 5 (pp. 67-127). New
    York: Academic Press.

Murdock, B. B. (1974 ). Human memory: Theory and data. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbawn
    Associates.

Murdock, B. B. (1980). Short-term recognition memory. In R. S. Nickerson (Ed), Informa-
    tion processing and cognition: The Loyola Symposium (pp. 497-519). Hillsdale, NJ:
    Lawrence Erlbawn Associates.

Murdock, B. B. (1982). A theory for the storage and retrieval of item and associative
    information. Psychological Review, 89,609-626.

Murdock, B. B. (1983). A distributed memory model for serial-order information. Psycho-
    logical Review, 90, 316-338.

Murdock, B. B. (in press). Serial organization in a distributed memory model. In A. F. Healy,
    S.M. Kosslyn, & R. M. Shiffrin (Eds.), From learning theory to cognitive processes:
    Essays in honor of William K. Estes. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbawn Associates.

Murdock, B. B., & Anderson, R. E. (1975). Encoding, storage, and retrieval of item
    information. In R. L. Solso (Ed.), /nfonnation processing and cognition: The Loyola
    Symposium (pp. 145-194). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbawn Associates.




                                     Copyrighted Material
18      LEWANDOWSKY AND HOCKLEY

Murdock, B. B., & Hockley, W. E. (1989a). Recognition in a distributed-memory model. In
    D. Vickers & P. L. Smith (Eds.), Human information processing: Measures, mecha-
    nisms, and models (pp. 395-409). Amsterdam: North-Holland

Murdock, B. B., & Hockley, W. E. (1989b). Short-term memory for associations. In G. H.
    Bower (Ed.), The psychology of learning and motivation, Volume 24 (pp. 71-1 08). San
    Diego: Academic Press.

Murdock, B. B., & Lewandowsky, S. (1986). Chaining 100 years later. In F. Klix &
    H. Hagendorf (Eds.), Human memory and cognitive capabilities (pp. 79-96). Amster-
    dam: North-Holland.

Murdock, B. B., Hockley, W. E., & Muter, P. (1977). Two tests of the conveyor-belt model
    for item recognition. Canadian Journal of Psychology, 31, 71-89.

Muter, P. (1979). Response latencies in discriminations of recency. Journal ofExperimental
    Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 5, 160-169.

Neath, I., & Crowder, R. G. (1990). Schedules of presentation and temporal distinctiveness
    in human memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
    Cognition,16, 316-327.

Nickerson, R. S. (1972). Binary classification reaction time: A review of some studies of
    human information-processing capabilities. Psychonomics Monograph Supplement, 4
    (Whole No. 65), 275-318.

Okada, R., & Burrows, D. (1978). The effects of subsidiary tasks on memory retrieval from
    long and short lists. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 30, 221-233.

Pike, R., Dalgleish, L., & Wright, J. (1977). A multiple-observations model for response
     latency and the latencies of correct and incorrect responses in recognition memory.
     Memory & Cognition, 5, 580-589.

Ratcliff, R. (1978). A theory of memory retrieval. Psychological Review, 85, 59-108.
Ratcliff, R. (1988). Continuous versus discrete information processing: Modeling accumu-
     lation of partial information. Psychological Review, 95, 238-255.

Ratcliff, R., Clark, S. E., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1990). List-strength effect I. Data and discus-
     sion. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 16,
     163-178.

Ratcliff, R., & Murdock, B. B. (1976). Retrieval processes in recognition memory. Psycho-
     logical Review, 83, 190-214.

Ryan, C. (1983). Reassessing the automaticity distinction: Item recognition as a paradigm
    case. Psychological Review, 90,171-178.

Shiffrin, R. M., & Cook, J. R. (1978). Short-term forgetting of item and order information.
     Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior,17, 189-218.

Shiffrin, R. M., Ratcliff, R., & Clark, S. E. (1990). List-strength effect: II. Theoretical
     mechanisms. Journal ofExperimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
     16,179-195.




                              Copyrighted Material
                                             1. TOWARDS AN INTEGRATION                  19

Shiffrin, R. M., & Schneider, W. (1977). Controlled and automatic human information
     processing: ll. Perceptual learning, automatic attending, and a general theory. Psycho-
     logical Review, 84, 127-190.

Shiffrin, R. M., & Schneider, W. (1984). Automatic and controlled processing revisited.
     Psychological Review, 91, 269-276.

Sternberg, S. (1966). High-speed scanning in human memory. Science, 153,652-654.

Sternberg, S. (1975). Memory scanning: New fmdings and current controversies. Quarterly
     Journal of Experimental Psychology, 27, 1-32.

Theios, J., Smith, P. G., Haviland, S. E., Traupman, J., & Moy, M. C. (1973). Memory
    scanning as a self-terminating process. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 97,
    323-336.

Tulving, E. (1979). Memory research: What kind of progress. In L. G. Nilsson (Ed.),
     Perspectives on memory research: Essays in honor of Uppsala UniversitY s SOOth
     anniversary (pp. 19-34). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.




                                     Copyrighted Material
Copyrighted Material
References

1 Relating Theory and Data: Towards an
Integration

Atkinson, R. C., Herrmann, D. J., & Wescourt, K. T. (1974).
Search processes in recognition memocy. In R. L. Sol so
(Ed.), Theories in cognitive psychology: The Loyola
Symposium (pp. 101-146). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.

Atkinson, R. C., Holmgren, J. E., & Juola, J. F. (1969).
Processing time as influenced by number of items in a
visual display. Perception &: Psychophysics, 6, 321-326.

Atkinson, R. C., & Juola, J. F. (1973). Factors
influencing speed and accuracy of word recognition. InS.
Kornblum (Ed.),Attention and performance: IV (pp. 583-612).
New York: Academic Press.

Atkinson, R. C., & Juola, J. F. (197 4 ). Search and
decision processes in recognition memory. In D. H. Krantz,
R. C. Atkinson, & R. D. Luce (Eds.), Contemporary
developments in mathematical psychology (Volume 1.
Learning, memory and thinking) (pp. 243-293). San
Francisco: Freeman.

Baddeley, A. D., & Ecob, J. R. (1973). Reaction time and
short-term memory: Implications of repetition effects for
the high-speed exhaustive scan hypothesis. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 25,229-240.

Bain, J.D., & Humphreys, M. S. (1988). Relational context:
Independent cues, meanings or configurations? In G. M.
Davies & D. M. Thomson (Eds.), Memory in context: Context
in memory (pp. 97 -137), London: Wiley.

Burrows, D., & Okada, R. (1971). Serial position effects
in high-speed memory search. Perception &: Psychophysics,
10, 305-308.

Burrows, D., & Okada, R. (1975). Memory retrieval from long
and short lists. Science, 188, 1031-1033.

Checkosky, S. F. (1971). Speeded classification of
multidimensional stimuli. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 87,383-388.

Clark, S. E., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1987). Recognition of
multiple probes. Memory &: Cognition, 15,367-378.
Corballis, M. C. (1967). Serial order in recognition and
recall. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 74, 113-114.

Corballis, M. C. (1986). Memory scanning: Can subjects
scan two sets at once? Psychological Review, 93, 113-114.

Corballis, M. C., & Miller, A. (1973). Scanning and
decision processes in recognition memocy. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 98, 379-386.

Corballis, M. C., Murray, J. E., & Connolly, G. (1989).
Memory scanning: Are fued and varied sets scanned
concurrently or successively? Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 15,
1175-1184.

Dosher, B. A. (1988). Retrieval dynamics of item and
associative information. Unpublished manuscript. 16
LEWANDOWSKY AND HOCKLEY Dosher, B. A., McElree, R, Hood,
M., & Rosedale, G. (1989). Retrieval dynamics of priming
in recognition memory: Bias and discrimination analysis.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition,15, 868-886. Ebbinghaus, H. (1913). Memory: A
contribution to experimental psychology. New York:
Columbia University, Teachers College. Eich, J.M. (1982).
A composite holographic associative recall model.
Psychological Review, 89,627-661. Elkind, G., &
Corballis, M. C. (1986). Scanning two memorized lists.
Memory & Cognition, 14,253-264. Gillund, G., & Shiffrin,
R. M. (1984). A retrieval model for both recognition and
recall. Psychological Review, 91,1-61. Gronlund, S. D., &
Ratcliff, R. (1989). Tune course of item and associative
information: hnplications for global memory models.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition,15, 846-858. Gronlund, S.D., & Ratcliff, R. (in
press). Analysis of the Hockley and Murdock decision
model. Journal of Mathematical Psychology. Hacker, M. J.
(1980). Speed and accuracy of recency judgments for events
in short-term memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Learning and Memory, 6, 651-675. Hintzman, D. L.
(1984). MINERVA 2: A simulation model of human memory.
Behavior Research Methods,/nstruments, and Computers,16,
96-101. Hockley, W. E. (1982). Retrieval processes in
continuous recognition. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 8, 497-512.
Hockley, W. E. (1984). Analysis of response time
distributions in the study of cognitive processes.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 10, 598-615. Hockley, W. E. (in press).
Interrogating memory: A decision model for recognition and
judgment of frequency. lnM. C. Corballis, K. G. White, &
W. Abraham (Eds.),Memory mechanisms: A tribute to G.V.
Goddard. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Hockley, W. E., & Corballis, M. C. (1982). Tests of serial
scanning in item recognition. Canadian Journal of
Psychology, 36, 189-212. Hockley, W. E., & Murdock, B. B.
(1987). A decision model for accuracy and response latency
in recognition latency. Psychological Review, 94, 341-358.
Hockley, W. E., & Murdock, B. B. (1991). Further
comparisons of the Hockley-Murdock and Ratcliff models: A
reply to Gronlund and Ratcliff. Manuscript submitted for
publication. Humphreys, M. S. (1976). Relational
information and the context effect in recognition memory.
Memory & Cognition, 4, 221-232. 1. TOWARDS AN INTEGRATION
17

Hwnphreys, M.S. (1978). Item and relational information: A
case for context independent retrieval. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 17, 175-187.

Hwnphreys, M. S., & Bain, J. D. (1983). Recognition
memory: A cue and information analysis. Memory &
Cognition, 11, 583-600.

Hwnphreys, M.S., Bain, J.D., & Pike, R. (1989). Different
ways to cue a coherent memory system: A theory for
episodic, semantic, and procedural tasks. Psychological
Review, 96, 208-233.

Hwnphreys, M.S., Pike, R., Bain, J.D., & Tehan, G. (1989).
Global matching: A comparison of the SAM, Minerva ll,
Matrix and TODAM models. Journal of Mathematical
Psychology, 33,36-67.

Lewandowsky, S., & Murdock, B. B. (1989a). Memory for
serial order. Psychological Review, 96,25-57.

Lewandowsky, S., & Murdock, B. B. (1989b). A distributed
memory model for associative learning. In D. Vickers & P.
L. Smith (Eds.), Human information processing: Measures,
mechanisms, and models (pp. 381-394). Amsterdam:
North-Holland

Mensink, G., & Raaijmakers, J. G. W. (1988). A model for
interference and forgetting. Psychological Review, 95,
434-455.

Murdock, B. B. (1967). An analysis of the recognition
process. In C. N. Cofer & B. S. Musgrave (Eds.), Verbal
behavior and learning (pp. 10-22). New York: McGraw-Hill.

Murdock, B. B. (1970). Short-termmemory for associations.
In D. A. Norman (Ed.),Models of human memory (pp.
285-304). New York: Academic Press.

Murdock, B. B. (1972). Short-term memory. In G. H. Bower
(Ed.), The psychology of learning and motivation: Advances
in research and theory, Vol. 5 (pp. 67-127). New York:
Academic Press.

Murdock, B. B. (1974 ). Human memory: Theory and data.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbawn Associates.

Murdock, B. B. (1980). Short-term recognition memory. In
R. S. Nickerson (Ed), Information processing and
cognition: The Loyola Symposium (pp. 497-519). Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbawn Associates.

Murdock, B. B. (1982). A theory for the storage and
retrieval of item and associative information.
Psychological Review, 89,609-626.

Murdock, B. B. (1983). A distributed memory model for
serial-order information. Psychological Review, 90,
316-338.

Murdock, B. B. (in press). Serial organization in a
distributed memory model. In A. F. Healy, S.M. Kosslyn, &
R. M. Shiffrin (Eds.), From learning theory to cognitive
processes: Essays in honor of William K. Estes.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbawn Associates.

Murdock, B. B., & Anderson, R. E. (1975). Encoding,
storage, and retrieval of item information. In R. L.
Solso (Ed.), /nfonnation processing and cognition: The
Loyola Symposium (pp. 145-194). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbawn Associates. 18 LEWANDOWSKY AND HOCKLEY Murdock,
B. B., & Hockley, W. E. (1989a). Recognition in a
distributed-memory model. In D. Vickers & P. L. Smith
(Eds.), Human information processing: Measures, mechanisms,
and models (pp. 395-409). Amsterdam: North-Holland
Murdock, B. B., & Hockley, W. E. (1989b). Short-term
memory for associations. In G. H. Bower (Ed.), The
psychology of learning and motivation, Volume 24 (pp. 71-1
08). San Diego: Academic Press. Murdock, B. B., &
Lewandowsky, S. (1986). Chaining 100 years later. In F.
Klix & H. Hagendorf (Eds.), Human memory and cognitive
capabilities (pp. 79-96). Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Murdock, B. B., Hockley, W. E., & Muter, P. (1977). Two
tests of the conveyor-belt model for item recognition.
Canadian Journal of Psychology, 31, 71-89. Muter, P.
(1979). Response latencies in discriminations of recency.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and
Memory, 5, 160-169. Neath, I., & Crowder, R. G. (1990).
Schedules of presentation and temporal distinctiveness in
human memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition,16, 316-327. Nickerson, R. S.
(1972). Binary classification reaction time: A review of
some studies of human information-processing capabilities.
Psychonomics Monograph Supplement, 4 (Whole No. 65),
275-318. Okada, R., & Burrows, D. (1978). The effects of
subsidiary tasks on memory retrieval from long and short
lists. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 30,
221-233. Pike, R., Dalgleish, L., & Wright, J. (1977). A
multiple-observations model for response latency and the
latencies of correct and incorrect responses in recognition
memory. Memory & Cognition, 5, 580-589. Ratcliff, R.
(1978). A theory of memory retrieval. Psychological Review,
85, 59-108. Ratcliff, R. (1988). Continuous versus
discrete information processing: Modeling accumulation of
partial information. Psychological Review, 95, 238-255.
Ratcliff, R., Clark, S. E., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1990).
List-strength effect I. Data and discussion. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
16, 163-178. Ratcliff, R., & Murdock, B. B. (1976).
Retrieval processes in recognition memory. Psychological
Review, 83, 190-214. Ryan, C. (1983). Reassessing the
automaticity distinction: Item recognition as a paradigm
case. Psychological Review, 90,171-178. Shiffrin, R. M.,
& Cook, J. R. (1978). Short-term forgetting of item and
order information. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior,17, 189-218. Shiffrin, R. M., Ratcliff, R., &
Clark, S. E. (1990). List-strength effect: II. Theoretical
mechanisms. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 16,179-195. 1. TOWARDS AN
INTEGRATION 19

Shiffrin, R. M., & Schneider, W. (1977). Controlled and
automatic human information processing: ll. Perceptual
learning, automatic attending, and a general theory.
Psychological Review, 84, 127-190.

Shiffrin, R. M., & Schneider, W. (1984). Automatic and
controlled processing revisited. Psychological Review, 91,
269-276.

Sternberg, S. (1966). High-speed scanning in human memory.
Science, 153,652-654.
Sternberg, S. (1975). Memory scanning: New fmdings and
current controversies. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 27, 1-32.

Theios, J., Smith, P. G., Haviland, S. E., Traupman, J., &
Moy, M. C. (1973). Memory scanning as a self-terminating
process. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 97, 323-336.

Tulving, E. (1979). Memory research: What kind of
progress. In L. G. Nilsson (Ed.), Perspectives on memory
research: Essays in honor of Uppsala UniversitY s SOOth
anniversary (pp. 19-34). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
2 Memory, Growth, Evolution, and
Laterality

Annett, M. (1985). l.£ft, right, hand, and brain: The right
shift theory. London: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Basser, L. S. (1962). Hemiplegia with early onset and the
faculty of speech with special reference to the effects
of hemispherectomy. Brain, 85, 427-460.

Beck, B. B. (1980). Animal too/ behavior: The use and
manufacture of tools by animals. New York: Garland STPM
Press. 2. MEMORY AND LATERALITY 35

Best, C. (1988). The emergence of cerebral asymmetries in
early hwnan development: A review and a neuroembryological
model. In D. L. Molfese & S. J. Segalowitz (Eds.), Brain
lateralization in children: Developmental implications
(pp. 5-34). New York: Guilford Press.

Bickerton, D. (1984). The language bioprogram hypothesis.
Behavioral & Brain Sciences, 7, 173-221.

Bishop, D. V. M. (1983). Linguistic impairment after left
hemidecortication for infantile hemiplegia? A critical
reappraisal. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psycho/ogy,35A, 199-207.

Bishop, D. V. M. (1988) Can the right hemisphere mediate
language as well as the left? A critical review of recent
research. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 5, 353-367.

Bliss, T. V. P., & Lomo, T. (1973). Long-lasting
potentiation of synaptic transmission in the dentate area
of the anaesthetized rabbit following stimulation of the
perforant path. Journal of Physiology, 232, 331-356.

Bolk, L. (1926). Das Problem der Menschwerdung. Jena:
Gustav Fischer.

Broca, P. (1865). Sur Ia siege de Ia faculte du langage
articule. Bulletins de Ia Societe d' Anthropo/ogie de
Paris, 6, 330-357.

Changeux, J.-P. (1980). Genetic determinism and epigenesis
of neuronal networks: Is there a biological compromise
between Chomsky and Piaget. In M. Piattelli-Palmarini
(Ed.), Language and learning: The debate between Jean
Piaget andNoam Chomsky (pp. 185197). Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Chomsky, N. (1966). Language and mind. New York: Harcourt,
Brace, Jovanovich.

Chomsky, N. (1980). On cognitive structures and their
development A reply to Piaget In M. Piattelli-Palmarini
(Ed.), Language and learning: The debate between Jean
Piaget and Noam Chomsky (pp. 35-52). Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.

Cline, H. T., Debski, E. A, & Constantine-Patton, M.
(1987). N-methylD-aspartatereceptor antagonist
desegregates eye-specific stripes. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 84, 4342-4345.

Corballis, M. C. (1989). Laterality and human evolution.
Psychological Review, 96, 492-505.

Corballis, M. C., & Beale, I. L. (1970). Bilateral
symmetry and behavicr. Psychological Review, 77,451-464.

Corballis, M. C., & Morgan, M. J. (1978). On the biological
basis of hwnan laterality: I. Evidence for a maturational
left-right gradient Behavioral & Brain Sciences, 1,
261-269.

Cotman, C. W., & Nieto-Sampedro, M. (1982). Brain function,
synapse renewal, and plasticity. Annual Review of
Psychology, 33, 371-401.

Craik, F. I. M., & Lockhart, R. S. (1972). Levels of
processing: A framework for memory research. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 11,671-684.

36 CORBALLIS

Curtiss, S. (1977). Genie: A psychological study of a
modern-day "wild child". New York: Academic Press.

Dennis, M., & Kohn, B. (1975). Comprehension of syntax in
infantile hemiplegics after cerebral hemidecortication.
Brain & Language, 2, 472-482.

Dennis, M., & Whitaker, H. A. (1976). Language acquisition
following hemidecortication: Linguistic superiority of
the left over the right hemisphere. Brain & Language, 3,
404-433.

Dudai, Y. (1989). The neurobiology of memory: Concepts,
findings, trends. New York: Oxford University Press.
Edehnan, G. M. (1987). Neural Darwinism: The theory of
neuronal group selection. New York: Basic Books.

Fodoc, J. A. (1983). The modularity of mind. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.

Foley, R. (1987). Hominid species and stone tool
assemblages. Antiquity, 61, 380-392.

Frost, G. T. (1980). Tool behavior and the origins of
laterality. Journal of Human Evolution, 9,447-459.

Geschwind, N., & Galaburda, A. M. (1987). Cerebral
lateralization: Biological mechanisms, associations, and
pathology. Cambridge, MA: A Bradford Book, MIT Press.

Harris, L. J. (1984). Louis Pierre Gratiolet, Paul Broca,
et al. on the question of a maturational left-right
gradient: Some forerunners of current-day models.
Behavioral & Brain Sciences, 7, 730-731.

Jeme, N. K. (1967). Antibodies and learning: Selection vs.
instruction. In G. C. Quarton, T. Melnechuk, & F. 0.
Schmitt (Eds.), The neurosciences: A study program. New
York: Rockefeller University Press.

Johnson, J. S., & Newport, E. L. (1989). Critical period
effects in second language learning: The influence of
maturational state on the acquisition of Fnglish as a
second language. Cognitive Psychology, 21, 60-99.

Kalil, R. E. (1989). Synapse formation in the developing
brain. Scientific American, 261 ( 6), 76-87.

Kalil, R. E., Dubin, M. W., Scott, G., & Stark, LA (1986).
Elimination of action potentials blocks the structural
development of retinogeniculate connections in the cat.
Nature, 323. 156-158.

Kleinschmidt, A, Bear, M. F., & Singer, W. (1987).
Blockade of 'NMDA' receptors disrupts experience-dependent
plasticity of kitten striate cortex. Science, 238,
355-357.

Kohn, B., & Dennis, M. (1974). Patterns of hemispheric
specialization after hemidecortication for infantile
hemiplegia. In M. Kinsboume & W. L Smith (Eds.),
Hemispheric disconnection and cerebra/function.
Springfield, ll..: Charles C. Thomas.
Krogman, W. M. (1972). Child growth. Ann Arbor, MI:
University of Michigan Press. 2. MEMORY AND LATERALITY 37

Kuhl, P. K., & Miller, J. D. (1975). Spech perception by
the chinchilla: Voice-voiceless

distinction in alveolar plosive consonants. Science, 190,
69-72.

Kuhl, P. K., & Padden, D. M. (1982). Enhanced
discriminability at the phonetic boundaries

for the voicing feature in macaques. Perception &
Psychophysics, 32,542-558.

Kuhl, P. K., & Padden, D. M. (1983). Enhanced
discriminability at the phonetic boundaries

for the place feature in macaques. Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 73,

1003-1010.

Lenneberg, E. H. (1967). Biological foundations of
language. New York: Wiley.

Liberman, A. M. (1982). On fmding that speech is special.
American Psychologist, 37,

148-167.

Liberman, A.M., &Mattingly,!. G. (1985). The motor theory
of speech perception revisited.

Cognition, 21, 1-36.

Liberman, A.M., & Mattingly, I. G. (1989). A
specialization for speech perception. Science,

243' 489-494.

MacBain, K. S., Best, C. T., & Strange, W. (1981).
Categorical perception of /r/ and Ill by

Japanese bilinguals. Applied Psycholinguistics, 269-290.

Massaro, D. W. (1987). Speech perception by ear and eye: A
paradigm for psychological
inquiry. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

McCasland, J. S. (1987). Neuronal control of bird song
production. Journal ofNeuroscience,

7, 23-39.

McFie, J. (1961). The effects of hemispherectomy on
intellectual functioning in cases of

infantile hemiplegia. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgey, &
Psychiatry, 24,240-249.

Miyamoto, M., Slightom, J. L., & Goodman, M. (1987).
Phylogenetic relations of humans

and African apes from DNA sequences in the ps-nu-globin
region. Science, 230,

369-373.

Murdock, B. B., Jr. (1962). The serial position effect in
free recall. Journal of Experimental

Psychology, 64, 482-488.

Murdock, B. B., Jr. (1979). Convolution and correlation in
perception and memory. In L.-G.

Nilsson (Ed.), Perspectives in memory research: Essays in
honor of Uppsala Univer

sitj s SOOth anniversary. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.

Murdock, B. B., Jr. (1982). A theory for the storage and
retrieval of item and associative

information. Psychological Review, 89,609-626.

Murdock, B. B., Jr. (1983). A distributed memory model for
serial-order information.

Psychological Review, 90, 316-318.

Nottebolun, F. (1972). Neurallateralization of vocal
control in a passerine bird. ll. Subsong,

calls, and a theory of vocal learning. Journal of
Experimental Zoology, 179,25-50.
38 CORBALLIS

Nottebolun, F. (1977). Asymmetries in neural control of
vocalization in the canary. InS. Hamad, R. W. Doty, L.
Goldstein, J. Jaynes, & G. Krauthamer (Eels.),
Lateralization in the nervous system. New York: Academic
Press.

Nottebolun, F. (1989). From bird song to neurogenesis.
Scientific American, 260(2 ), 74-79.

Passingham, R. E. (1982). The human primate. San
Francisco, CA: W.H. Freeman.

Ogden, J. A. (1988). Language and memory recovery after
long recovery periods in left-hemispherectomized subjects.
Neuropsychologia, 26, 645-659.

Ogden, J. A. (1989). V.suospatial and other
"right-hemispheric" functions after long recovery periods
in left-hemispherectomized subjects. Neuropsychologia, 27,
765-776.

Passingham, R. E. (1982). The human primate. San
Francisco, CA: W. H. Freeman.

Piattelli-Palmarini, M. (1980) .Language and leaming: The
debate betweenJeanPiaget and Noam Chomsky. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.

Piattelli-Palmarini, M. (1989). Evolution, selection, and
cognition: From "learning" to parameter setting in
biology and the study of language Cognition, 31, 1-44.

Purves, D., & Voyvodic, J. T. (1987). 1maging mammalian
nerve cells and their connections over time in living
animals. Trends in Neuroscience, 10, 398-404.

Rakic, P. (1985). Limits of neurogenesis in primates.
Science, 227, 1054-1056.

Rwnelhart, D. E., McClelland, J. L., & the PDP Research
Group. (1986). Parallel distributed processing:
Explorations in the microstructure of cognition. Vol. 1:
Foundations. Cambridge, MA: Bradford/MIT Press.

Sarich, V. M., & Wilson, A. C. (1967). Immunological time
scale for hominid evolution. Science, 158, 1200-1203.
Teyler, T. J., Perkins, A. T., IV, & Harris, K. M. (1989).
The development of long-term potentiation in hippocampus
and neocortex. Neuropsychologia, 27, 31-39.

Thatcher, R. W., Walker, R. A., & Giudice, S. (1987).
Hwnan cerebral hemispheres develop at different rates and
ages. Science, 236, 1110-1113.

Tsurnoto, T., Hagihara, K., Sato, H., & Hata, Y. (1987).
NMDA receptors in the visual cortex of young kittens are
more effective than those of adult cats. Nature,
327,513-514.

Turner, R. W., Baimbridge, K. G., & Miller, J. J. (1982).
Calciwn-induced long-term potentiation in the hippocampus.
Neuroscience, 7, 1411-1416.

Werker, J. F. (1989). Becoming a native listener. American
Scientist, 77, 54-59.

Wiesel, T. N. (1982). Postnatal development of the visual
cortex and the influence of the environment Nature,
299,583-591.
3 Why Are Formal Models Useful In
Psychology?

Anderson, J. R., & Reder, L. M. (1987). Effects of number
of facts studied on recognition versus sensibility
judgments. Journal of Experimenlal Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition,13, 355-367.

Beyth-Marom, R., & Fischhoff, B. (1983). Diagnosticity and
pseudodiagnosticity. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 45, 1185-1195.

Bjork, R. A (1973). Why mathematical models? American
Psychologist, 28, 426-433.

Bjork, R. A. (1978). Theupdatingofhumanmemmy. In G. H.
Bower(Ed.), The Psychology of Learning and Motivation,
Vol.l2. (pp. 235-259). New York: Academic Press.

Bower, G. H. (1961). Application of a model to
paired-associate learning. Psychometrika, 26, 255-280.

Broadbent, D. (1987). Simple models for experimental
situations. In P. Morris (Ed.), Modelling Cognition. (pp.
169-185). London: Wiley.

Bruner, J. S., Goodnow, J. J., & Austin, G. A (1962). A
Study ofThinking. New York: Wiley.

Davis,P. J., & Hersh, R (1981). The mathematical
experience. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

Doherty, M. E., Mynatt, C. R, Tweney, RD., & Schiavo, M.D.
(1979). Pseudodiagnosticity. Acta Psychologica, 43,
111-121.

Eich, J. M. ( 1982). A composite holographic associative
recall model. Psychological Review, 89, 627-661.

Fischhoff, B. (1975). Hindsight'* foresight: The effects
of outcome knowledge on judgment Wlder Wlcertainty.
Journal of Experimenlal Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 1, 288-299.

Fischhoff, B., & Beyth, R (1975). "I knew it would
happen:" Remembered probabilities of once-future things.
Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 13, 1-16.

GillWld, G., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1984). A retrieval model
for both recognition and recall . Psychological Review,
91,1-61.

Hasher, L., Goldstein, D., & Toppino, T. (1977). Frequency
and the conference of referential validity. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior,16, 107-112.

Hintzman, D. L. (1968). Explorations with a discrimination
net model for paired-associate learning. Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 5, 123-162. 54 HINTZMAN
Hintzman, D. L. (1984). MINERVA 2: A simulation model of
human memo!)'. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, &
Computers,], 96-101. Hintzman, D. L. (1986). "Schema
abstraction" in a multiple-trace memory model.
Psychological Review, 93, 411-428. Hintzman, D. L.
(1987). Recognition and recall in MINERVA 2: Analysis of
the "recognition failure" paradigm. In P. E. Morris
(Ed.), Modelling Cognition (pp. 215-229). London: Wiley.
Hintzman, D. L. (1988). Judgments of frequency and
recognition memory in a multiple-trace memory model.
Psychological Review, 95,528-551. Hintzman, D. L. (1990).
Human learning and memory: Connections and dissociations.
Annual Review of Psychology, 41, 109-139. Hintzman, D.
L., & Ludlam, G. (1980). Differential fcrgetting of
prototypes and old instances: Simulation by an
exemplar-based classification model. Memory & Cognition, 8,
378-382. Humphreys, M.S. , Bain, J.D., & Pike, R. (1989).
Different ways to cue a coherent memory system: A theory
for episodic, semantic, and procedural tasks. Psychological
Review, 96, 208-233. Janis, I . L., & Frick, F. (1943).
The relationship between attitudes toward conclusions and
errors in judging logical validity of syllogisms. Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 33,73-77. Johnson, M. K.,
Bransford, J.D., & Solomon, S. (1973). Memory for tacit
implications of sentences. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 98, 203-205. Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1983).
Mental models. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Kline, M. (1985). Mathematics and the search for
knowledge. New York: Oxford University Press. Koehler,
J. J. (1989). The influence of prior beliefs on scientific
judgments of evidence quality. Manuscript submitted for
publication. Kotovsky, K., Hayes, J. R., & Simon, H. A.
(1985). Why are some problems hard? Evidence from Tower
of Hanoi. Cognitive Psychology,17, 248-294. Leahey, T.
H., & Harris, R. J. (1985). Human learning. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. Lefford, A. (1946). The
influence of emotional subject matter on logical reasoning.
The Journal of General Psychology, 34,127-151. Lord, C.
G., Ross, L., & Lepper, M. R. (1979). Biased assimilation
and attitude polarization: The effects of prior theories
on subsequently considered evidence. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 37, 2098-2109. McClelland, J. L.
(1979). On the time relations of mental processes: An
examination of systems of processes in cascade.
Psychological Review, 86,287-330. 3. FORMAL MODELS 55

McClelland, J. L (1988). Connectionist models and
psychological evidence. Journal of MemoryandLanguage,27,
107-123.

McCloskey, M., & Zaragoza, M.S. (1985). Misleading
postevent information and memory for events: Arguments and
evidence against memory impairment hypotheses. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 114,3-18.

Murdock, B. B. Jr. (1960). The distinctiveness of stimuli.
Psychological Review, 67, 16-31.

Murdock, B. B., Jr. (1982). A theory for the storage and
retrieval of item and associative information.
Psychological Review, 89, 609-626.

Murdock, B. B. (1989).l..earning in a distributed memory
model. In C. Izawa (Ed.), Current issues in cognitive
processes: The Tulane symposium of cognition (pp. 69-106).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence &lbaum Associates.

Mynatt, C. R, Doherty, M. E., & Tweney, R. D. (1977).
Confirmation bias in a simulated research environment: An
experimental study of scientific inference. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 29,85-95.

Nisbett, R E., Fong, G. T., lehman, D. R., & Cheng, P. W.
(1987). Teaching reasoning. Science, 238, 625-631.

Nosofsk:y, R. M. (1988). Exemplar-based accmmts of
relations between classification, recognition, and
typicality. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 14,700-708.

Pagels, H. R. (1988). The dreams of reason. New York: Simon
and Schuster.

Raaijmakers, J. G. W., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1980). SAM: A
theory of probabilistic search of associative memory. In
G. H. Bower (Ed.), The psychology of learning and
motivation, Vol.l4. (pp. 207-262). New York: Academic
Press.

Ratcliff, R., Clark, S., & Shiffrin, R. (1990). The
list-strength effect I. Data and discussion. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
16, 163-178.

Reichenbach, H. (1951). The rise of scientific philosophy.
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

Suppes,P. (1984). Probabilistic metaphysics. Oxford: Basil
Blackwell.

Townsend, J. T. ( 1990). Serial vs. parallel processing:
Sometimes they look like Tweedledum and Tweedledee but
they can (and should) be distinguished. Psychological
Science, 1, 46-54.

Townsend, J. T., & Kadlec, H. (1989). Psychology and
mathematics. In R. E. Mickens (Ed.), Mathematics and
science. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Tversk:y, A., & Kahneman, D. (1973). Availability: A
heuristic for judging frequency and probability.
Cognitive Psychology, 5, 207-232.

Tversk:y, A., & Kahneman, D. (1981). The framing of
decisions and the psychology of choice. Science, 211,
453-458. 56 HINTZMAN Wason, P. C., & Johnson-Laird, P. N.
(1972). Psyclwlogy of reasoning: Structure and content.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Watkins, M. J.
(1990). Mediationism and the obfuscation of memory.
American Psyclwlogist, 45,328-335.
4 Memory Theory and the Boundary
Conditions of the Tulving-Wiseman Law

Anderson, J. R. (1983). The architecture of cognition.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Bahrick, H. P. (1970). A two-phase model for prompted
recall. Psychological Review, 77, 215-222.

Bartling, C. A., & Thompson, C. P. (1977). Encoding
specificity: Retrieval symmetry in the recognition failure
paradigm. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Learning and Memory,3, 690-700.

Begg, I. (1979). Trace loss and the recognition failure of
unrecalled words. Memory & Cognition, 7, 113-123.

Broadbent, D. E., & Broadbent, M. H. P. (1975). The
recognition of words which cannot be recalled. In P.M. A.
Rabbitt & S. Dornic (Eds.), Attention and Performance V.
London: Academic Press.

Bryant, D. (1990). Exceptions to recognition failure as a
function of the encoded association between cue and
target. Manuscript submitted for publication.

Craik, F. I. M., & Tulving, E. (1975). Depth of processing
and the retention of words in episodic memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 1, 268-294.

Donnelly, R.E. (1988). Priming effects in successive
episodic tasks. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 14,256-265. 72 NILSSON
AND GARDINER Fisher, R. (1979). Retrieval operations in
cued recall and recognition. Memory&: Cognition, 7,
224-231. Aexser, A. J., & Thlving, E. (1978). Retrieval
independence in recognition and recall. Psychological
Review, 85, 153-171. Aexser, A. J., & Tulving, E. (1982).
Priming and recognition failure. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 21, 237-248. Gardiner, J.
M. (1988). Recognition failures and free-recall failures:
Implications for the relation between recall and
recognition. Memory&: Cognition, 16,446-451. Gardiner, J.
M. (1989). The Tulving-Wiseman law and exceptions to it In
A. F. Bennett & K. M. Me Conkey (Eds.), Cognition in
individual and social contexts (pp. 253-260). Amsterdam:
North-Holland. Gardiner, J. M., Kaminska, Z., Java, R.I.,
Clarke, E. F., & Mayer,P. (1990). The TulvingWiseman law
and the recognition of recallable music. Memory &:
Cognition, 18, 632-637. Gardiner, J. M, & Nilsson, L. G.
(1990). Relation between recognition and recall: The
Tulving-Wiseman law. (Umea Technical Reports No. 205).
UmeA: University ofUmeA, Department of Psychology.
Gardiner, J. M., & Tulving, E. (1980). Exceptions to
recognition failure of recallable words. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 19, 194-209. Gillund, G., &
Shiffrin, R. M. (1984). A retrieval model for both
recognition and recall. Psychological Review, 91, 1-67.
Hayman, C. A. G., & Tulving, E. (1989). Contingent
dissociation between recognition and fragment completion:
The method of triangulation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 15,228-240.
Hintzman, D. L. (1987). Recognition and Recall in MINERVA
2: Analysis of the ''recognition-failure" paradigm. In P.
Morris (Ed.), Modeling cognition (pp. 215-229). London:
Wiley. Humphreys, M.S., Bain, J.D., & Pike, R. (1989).
Different ways to cue a coherent memory system: A theory
for episodic, semantic, and procedural tasks.
Psychological Review, 96, 208-233. Jones, G. V. (1978).
Recognition failure and dual mechanisms in recall.
Psychological Review, 85,464-469. Jones, G. V. (1983).
Structure of the recall process. Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society, B302, 373-385. Jones, G. V.
(1987). Independence and exclusivity among psychological
processes: Implications for the structure of recall.
Psychological Review, 94,229-235. Jones, G. V., &
Gardiner, J. M. (1990). Recognition failure when
recognition brgets and recall cues are identical.
Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 28, 105-108. 4.
TULVING-WISEMAN LAW 73

Kaplan, A. (1964). The conduct of inquiry: Methodology for
behavioral science. New York: Chandler.

Kintsch, W. (1970). Models for free recall and recognition.
In D. A. Norman (Ed.), Models of human memory (pp.
331-373). New York: Academic Press.

McCormack, P. D. (1972). Recognition memory: How complex a
retrieval system? Canadian Journal of Psychology, 26,
19-41.

Metcalfe, J. (1990). Recognition failure and the composite
memory trace in CHARM. Manuscript submitted for
publication.

Murdock, B. B., Jr. (1979). Convolution and correlation in
perception and memory. In L.-G. Nilsson (Ed.),
Perspectives on memory research (pp. 105-120). Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Murdock, B. B., Jr. (1982). A theory for the storage and
retrieval of item and associative information.
Psychological Review, 89,609-62.

Murdock, B. B., Jr. (1983). A distributed memory model for
serial order information. Psychological Review,
90,316-338.

Muter, P. (1984). Recognition and recall of words with a
single meaning. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 10, 198-202.

Neely, J. H., & Payne, D. G. (1983). A direct comparison of
recognition failure rates for recallable names in episodic
and semantic memory tests. Memory & Cognition, 11,
161-171.

Nilsson, L.-G., Dinniwell, M., & Tulving, E. (1987).
Recognition failure of categorized words. Memory &
Cognition, 15, 389-396.

Nilsson, L.-G., Law, J., & Tulving, E. (1988). Recognition
failure of recallable unique names: Evidence for an
empirical law of memory and learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
14,266-277.

Nilsson, L.-G., & Shaps, L. P. (1980). A fimctional view
of memory. In F. Klix & J. Hoffmann (Eds.), Cognition and
memory: Interdisciplinary research of human memory
activities (pp. 40-46). Berlin: Deutscher Verlag der
Wissenschaften.

Nilsson, L.-G., & Shaps, L. P. (1981). A reconstructive
processing interpretation of the recognition failure
phenomenon. Acta Psychologia, 47, 25-37.

Rabinowitz, J. C. ( 1984 ). Aging and recognition failure.
Journal of Gerontology, 39, 65-71.

Rabinowitz, J. C., Mandler, G., & Barsalou, L. W. (1977).
Recognition failure: Another case of retrieval failure.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavicr,16, 639-663.

Ratcliff, R., & McKoon, G. (1989). Memory models, text
processing, and cue-dependent retrieval. In H. L. Roediger
& F. I. M. Craik (Eds.), Varieties of memory and
consciousness: Essays in honor of Endel Tulving (pp.
73-92). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 74
NILSSON AND GARDINER Salzberg, P.M. (1975). On the
generality of encoding specificity. Journal of Experimental
Psyclwlogy: Human Learning and Memory, 2, 586-596. Tajika,
H. (1978). Features of recognition tasks in encoding
specificity: The function of context in recognition tasks.
Japanese Psyclwlogical Research, 20, 93-100. Tajika, H.
(1979). Memory processes in recall and recognition.
Psyclwlogia, 22, 146-154. Tulving, E. (1974). Recall and
recognition of semantically encoded words. Journal of
Experimental Psyclwlogy,102, 778-787. Tulving, E. (1976).
Ecphoric processes in recall and recognition. In J. Brown
(Ed.), Recall and recognition (pp. 37-73). London: Wiley.
Tulving, E. (1983). Elements of episodic memory. New York:
Oxford University Press. Tulving, E., & Thomson, D. M.
(1973). Encoding specificity and retrieval processes in
episodic memory. Psyclwlogical Review, 80, 352-373.
Tulving, E., & WiSeman, S. (1975). Relation between
recognition and recognition failure of recallable words.
Bulletin of the Psyclwnomic Society, 6, 79-82. Watkins,
M. J., & Gardiner, J. M. (1979). An appreciation of
generaterecognize theory of recall. Journal ofVerbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior,18, 687-704. Watkins, M. J.,
& Todres, A. K. (1978). On the relation between recall and
recognition. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior,17, 621-633.
5 Beyond Strategies: Implications of
Memory Representation and Memory
Processes for Models of Judgment and
Decision Making

Anderson, J. A. (1969). A memory storage model utilizing
spatial correlation functions. Kybernetik,5,ll3-ll9.

Anderson, J. A. (1973). A theory for the recognition of
items from short memorized lists. Psyclwlogical Review,
80,417-438.

Anderson, N. H. (1964 ). A note on weighted sum and linear
operator models. Psyclwnomic Science,] , 189-190.

Anderson, N. H. (1981). Foundations of information
integration theory. New York: Academic Press.

Anderson, N. H., & Hubert, S. (1963). Effects of
concomitant verbal recall on order effects in personality
impression formation. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 2, 379-391.

Atkinson, R. C., & Juola, J. F. (1973). Factors
influencing speed and accuracy of word recognition. InS.
Kornblum (Ed.), Attention and Performance N (pp. 583-612).
New York: Academic Press.

Beach, L. R. , & Mitchell, T. R. (1978). A contingency
model for the selection of decision strategies. Academy
of Management Journal, 3, 439-449.

Beattie, J., & Baron, J. (in press). Investigating the
effect of stimulus range on attribute weight. Journal of
Experimental Psyclwlogy: Human Perception and Performance.

Ben Zur, H., & Bresnitz, S. J. (1981). The effect of time
pressure on risky choice behavicr. Acta Psychologica,
47,89-104.

Bembach, H. (1967). Decision processes in memocy.
Psychological Review, 74,462-480.

Beyth-Marom, R., & Fischhoff, B. (1977). Direct measures
of availability and judgments of category frequency.
Bulletin of the Psyclwnomic Society, 9, 236-238.

Brehmer, B. (1980).1n one word: Not from experience. Acta
Psychologica, 45,223-241.
96 WEBER, GOLDSTEIN, AND BUSEMEYER

Busemeyer, J. R (1985). Decision making under Wlcertainty:
A comparison of simple scalability, fixed-sample, and
sequential-sampling models. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 11, 538-564.

Carlston, D. E. (1980). The recall and use of traits and
events in social inference processes. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 16, 303-328.

Dreben, E. K., Fiske, S. T., & Hastie, R. (1979). The
independence of evaluative and item information:
Impression and recall order effects in behavioc-based
impression formation. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 37, 1758-1768.

Edwards, W. (1954). The theory of decision making.
Psychological Bulletin, 51,380-417.

Eich, J. M. ( 1982). A composite holographic associative
recall model. Psychological Review, 89,627-661.

Einhorn, H. J., & Hogarth, R. M. (1978). Confidence in
judgment: The illusion of validity. Psychological Review,
85, 395-416.

Fischhoff, B. (1975). Hindsight :t foresight: The effect
of outcome knowledge on judgment uncertainty. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance,
1, 288-299.

Goldstein, W. M., & Einhorn, H. J. (1987). Expression
theory and the preference reversal phenomena.
Psychological Review, 94,236-254.

Hastie, R, & Kumar, A. P. (1979). Person memory:
Personality traits as organizing principles in memory for
behavioc. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37,
25-38.

Hastie, R., & Park, B. (1986). The relationship between
memory and judgment depends on whether the judgment task
is memory-based or on-line. Psychological Review, 93,
258-268.

Hawkins, S. A., & Hastie, R. (1990). Hindsight: Biased
judgments of past events after the outcomes are known.
Psychological Bulletin, 107, 311-327.
Higgins, E. T., & Bargh, J. A. (1987). Social cognition
and social perception. Annual Review of Psychology, 38,
369-425.

Hockley, W. E. (1984). Analysis of response time
distributions in the study of cognitive processes. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 10,598-615.

Hockley, W. E., & Murdock, B. B. (1987). A decision model
for accuracy and response latency in recognition memrny.
Psychological Review, 94, 341-358.

Hogarth, R. M., & Einhorn, H. J. (1990). Order effects in
belief updating: The belief-adjustment model. (Technical
Report 155). University of Chicago Center for Decision
Research. 5. JUDGMENT AND DECISION MAKING 97

Hopfield, J. J. (1982). Neural networks and physical
systems with emergent collective computational abilities.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, USA, 79,
2554-2558.

Huber, J., Payne, J. W., & Puto, C. (1982). Adding
asymmetrically dominated alternatives: Violations of
regularity and the similarity hypothesis. Journal of
Consumer Research, 9, 90-98.

Huber, 0. (1980). The influence of some task variables on
cognitive operations in an information processing decision
model. Acta Psychologica, 45, 187-196.

Humphreys, M.S., Bain, I. D., & Pike, R (1989). Different
ways to cue a coherent memory system: A theory for
episodic, semantic, and procedural tasks. Psychological
Review, 96, 208-233.

Johnson, E., & Payne, I. W. (1985). Effort and accuracy in
choice. Management Science, 31, 395-414.

Kahneman, D., Slovic, A., & Tversk:y, A. (1982). (Eds.),
Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An
analysis of decision under risk. EconometrilaJ, 47,
263-291.

Klayman, J., & Ha, Y.-W. (1987). Confumation,
disconfumation, and information in hypothesis testing.
Psychological Review, 94, 211-228.

Lewandowsky, S., & Murdock, B. B. (1989). Memory for
serial order. Psychological Review, 96,25-57.

Lichtenstein, M., & Srull, T. K. (1985). Conceptual and
methodological issues in examining the relationship
between consumer memory and judgment. In L. AI witt & A.
A. Mitchell (Eds.), Psychological processes and
advertising effects: Theory, research, and application
(pp. xx-xx). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Lichtenstein, M., & Srull, T. K. (1987). Processing
objectives as a determinant of the relationship between
recall and judgment. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 23,93-118.

Lichtenstein, S., Fischhoff, B., & Phillips, L. D. (1982).
Calibration of probabilities: The state of the art to
1980. In D. Kahneman, P. Slovic, & A. Tversky (Eds.),
Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases (pp.
xx-xx). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Lichtenstein, S., & Slovic, P. (1971). Reversal of
preference between bids and choices in gambling decisions.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 89,46-55.

Lichtenstein, S., & Slovic, P. (1973). Response-induced
reversals of preference in gambling: An extended
replication in Las Vegas.Journal
ofExperimenta/Psychology,JOJ, 16-20.

Lingle, I. H., Dukerich, I. M., & Ostrom, T. M. (1983).
Accessing information in memorybased impression judgments:
Incongruity vs. negativity in retrieving selectivity.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 44, 252-272.

98 WEBER, GOLDSTEIN, AND BUSEMEYER

Lingle, J. H., Geva, N., Ostrom, T. M., Lieppe, M. R., &
Bawngardner, M. H. (1979). Thematic effects of person
judgments on impression formation. Journal of Personality
and Social Psyclwlogy, 37, 674-687.

Markowitz, H. (1959). Portfolio selection: Efficient
diversification of investment. New York: Wiley.

Markus, H., & Zajonc, R. B. (1985). The cognitive
perspective in social psychology. In G. Lindzey & E.
Aronson (Eds.), Handbook of Social Psychology (3rd edition,
pp. 118129). New York: Random House.

McArthur, L. Z. (1980). IDusory causation and illusory
correlation: Two epistomological accounts. Personality
and Social Psyclwlogy Bulletin, 6, 507-519.

Metcalfe, J., & Murdock, B. B. (1981). An encoding and
retrieval model of single-trial free recall. Journal
ofVerbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 20, 161-189.

Murdock, B. B., Jr. (1982). A theory for the storage and
retrieval of item and associative information.
Psychological Review, 89, 609-626.

Murdock, B. B., Jr. (1983). A distributed memory model for
serial-order information. Psyclwlogical Review, 90,
316-338.

Murdock, B. B., Jr. (1987). Serial order effects in a
distributed memory model. In D. S. Gorfein & R. R. Hoffman
(Eds.), Memory and learning: The Ebbinghaus centennial
conference (pp. 277-310). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbawn
Associates.

Murdock, B. B., Jr. (1989). Learning in a distributed
memory model. In C. Izawa (Ed.), Current issues in
cognitive processes: The Tulane Floweree symposium on
cognition (pp. 69-106). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.

Murdock, B. B., Jr., & Lamon, M. (1988). The replacement
effect: Repeating some items while replacing others.
Memory & Cognition, 16,91-101.

Payne, J. W. (1980). Information processing theory: Some
concepts and methods applied to decision research. InT.
S. Wallsten (Ed.), Cognitive Processes in choice and
decision behavior (pp. 95-112). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbawn Associates.

Payne, J. W. (1982). Contingent decision behavi<r.
Psychological Buiietin, 92,382-402.

Payne, J. W., Bettrnan, J. R., & Johnson, E. J. (1988).
Adaptive strategy selection in decision making. Journal
of Experimental Psyclwlogy: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 14, 534-552.

Payne, J. W., Bettman, J. R., & Johnson, E. J. (1990). The
adaptive decision maker: Effort and accuracy in choice. In
R. M. Hogarth (Ed.), Insights in decision making: A tribute
to Hillel J. Einlwm (pp. 129-153). Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Pennington, N., & Hastie, R. (1986). Evidence evaluation
in complex decision making. Journal of Personality and
Social Psyclwlogy, 51,242-258.

Pennington, N., & Hastie, R. (1988). Explanation-based
decision making: The effects of memory structure on
judgment. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, M
emory, and Cognition, 14,521-533. 5. JUDGMENT AND
DECISION MAKING 99

Ratcliff, R (1978). A theory of memory retrieval.
Psychological Review, 85, 59-108.

Ross, L., & Lepper, M.R (1980). The perseverance of
beliefs: Empirical and normative

considerations. In R.A. Shweder (Ed.), New directions for
methodology of social and

behavioral science: Fallible judgment in behavioral
research (pp.17-36). San Fran

cisco: Jossey-Bass.

Savage, L. J. (1954). The foundotions of statistics. New
York: Wiley.

Schum, D. A., & Martin, A. W. (1982). Formal and empirical
research on cascaded inference in jurisprudence. Law and
Society Review, 17,105-15l.

Sherman, S. J., Judd, C. M., & Park, B. (1989). Social
cognition. Annual Review of Psychology, 40,281-326.

Sherman, S. J., Zehner, K. S., Johnson, J., & Hirt, E. R.
(1983). Social explanation: The role of timing, set, and
recall on subjective likelihood estimates. Journal of
Personality and

Social Psychology, 44, 1127-1143.

Simon, H. A. ( 1955). A behavioral model of rational
choice. Quarterly Journal of &onomics,

59,99-118.
Simon, H. A. (1956). Rational choice and the structure of
the environment. Psychological Review, 63,129-138.

Slovic, P., Fischhoff, B., & Lichtenstein, S. (1982).
Response mode, framing, and information-processing effects
in risk assessment. In R Hogarth (Ed.), New directions for
methodology of social and behavioral sciences: Question
framing and response mode (pp. 21-36). San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass.

Srull, T. K. (1981). Person memory: Some tests of
associative storage and retrieval models.

Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and
Memory, 7, 440-463.

Svenson, 0. (1983). Decision rules and information
processing in decision making. In L. Sjoberg, T. Tyszka, &
J. A. Wise (Eds.), Human decision making (pp. 131-162).

Bodafors, Sweden: Doxa.

Swets, J. A., & Green, D. M. (1961). Sequential
observations by human observers of signals in noise. In
C. Cherry (Ed.), Information theory: Proceedings of the
fourth London

symposium (pp. 177-195). London: Butterworth.

Trabasso, T., & van den Broek, P. (1985). Causal thinking
and the representation of narrative

events. Journal of Memory and Language, 24, 612-630.

Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1973). Availability: A
heuristic for judging frequency and

probability. Cognitive Psychology, 5, 207-232.

Tversky, A., &Kahneman, D. (1981). The framing of
decisions and the psychology of choice.

Science, 21 I, 453-458.

Tversky, A., Sattath, S., & Slovic, P. (1988). Contingent
weighting in judgment and choice.

Psychological Review, 95,371-384.

100 WEBER, GOLDSTEIN, AND BUSEMEYER
von Neumann, J., & Morgenstern, 0. (1947). Theory of games
and economic behavior (2nd ed.). Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.

Weber, E. U. (1988). Expectation and variance of item
resemblance distributions in a convolution-correlation
model of distributive memory. Journal of Mathematical
Psychology, 32, 1-43.

Weber, E. U., & Murdock, B. B. (1989). Priming in a
distributed memory system: Implications for models of
implicit memory. In S. Lewandowsky, J. C. Dunn, & K.
Kirsner (Eds.), Implicit memory: Theoretical issues (pp.
87-98). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Wickelgren, W., & Norman, D. (1966). Strength models and
serial position in short-term recognition memory. Journal
of Mathematical Psychology,3, 316-347.

Wyer, R. S., Jr., & Srull, T. K. (Eds.) (1984). Handbook
of Social Cognition, Vols. 1-3. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
6 Varieties of Theoretical Perspectives

Atkinson, R. C., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1968). Hwnanmemory: A
proposed system and its control processes. InK. W.
Spence, & J. T. Spence (Eds.) The psyclwlogy of learning
and motivation: Advances in research and theory, vol2 (pp.
89-195). New York: Academic Press.

Baddeley, A. D., Thomson, N., & Buchanan, M. (1975). Word
length and the structure of short-term memocy. Journal
ofVerbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 14, 575-589.

Bronowski, J., & Mazlish, B. (1960). The Western
intellectual tradition. New York: Harper &Row.

Burchfield, J.D. (1975). Lord Kelvin and the age of the
earth. New York: Science History Publications.

Churchland, P.M. (1984). Matter and consciousness.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

James, W. (1907/1955). Pragmatism. New York: Meridian.

Lockhart, R. S. (1989). The role of theory in
understanding implicit memory. In S. Lewandowsky, J. C.
Dunn, & K. Kirsner (Eds.) Implicit memory: Theoretical
issues. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Lockhart, R. S., & Craik, F. I. M. (1978). Levels of
processing: A reply to Eysenck. British Journal of
Psychology, 69, 171-175.

Lockhart, R. S., & Craik, F. I. M. (1990). Levels of
processing: A retrospective analysis of a framework for
memory research. Canadian Journal of Psychology, 44,
87-112.

Mayr, E. (1982). The growth of biological thought.
Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.

Penrose, R. (1989). The emperor's new mind: Concerning
computers, minds, and the laws of physics. New York:
Oxford University Press.

Pinker, S., &Bloom, P. (1990). Natural language and
natural selection. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
/3,707-784.

Stanovitch, K. E. (1989). How to think straight about
psyclwlogy (2nd Ed.). Glenview, ll.,: Scott, Foresman.
7 The Microscope Metaphor In Human Memory

Hooke, R (1665). Micrographia, or some physiological
descriptions of minuJe bodies made by magnifying glasses
with observations and inquiries thereupon. London: Royal
Society.

Hull, C. L. (1935). The conflicting psychologies of
learning-a way out. Psychological Review, 42,491-516.

Lewandowsky, S., & Murdock, B. B., Jr. (1989). Memory for
serial order. Psychological Review, 96,25-57.

Miller, N. E., & Stevenson, S. S: (1936). Agitated behavior
of rats during experimental extinction and a theory of
spontaneous recovery. Journal of Comparative Psychology,
21' 205-231.

Murdock, B. B., Jr. (1960). The distinctiveness of
stimuli. Psychological Review, 67, 16-31.

Murdock, B. B., Jr. (1961). The retention of individual
items. Journal of Experimental Psychology,62,618-635 .

Nairne, J. S. (1990). Similarity and long-term memory for
order. Journal of Memory and Language, 29,733-746.

Neath, 1., & Crowder, R. G. (1990). Schedules of
presentation and temporal distinctiveness in human
memor.y. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 16, 316-327.

Roediger, H. L., & Crowder, R G. (1976). A serial position
effect in recall of United States Presidents. Bulletin of
the Psychonomic Society, 8, 275-278.

Rundus, D. (1971). Analysis of rehearsal processes in free
recall. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 89,63-77.

Tulving, E. & Schacter, D. L. (1990). Priming and human
memory systems. Science, 247, 301-306.

Wright, A. A., Santiago, H. C., Sands, S. F., Kendrick, D.
F., & Cook, R G. (1985). Memory processing of serial
lists by pigeons, monkeys, and people. Science, 229,
287-289.
8 Comparing Short-Term Recall of Item,
Temporal, and Spatial Information in
Children and Adults

Berch, D. B. (1979). Coding of spatial and temporal
information in episodic memory. In H. W. Reese, & L P.
Lipsitt (Eds.),Advances in child development and behavior
(Vol. 13, pp. 1-46). New York: Academic Press.

Brady, S., Mann, V., & Schmidt, R (1987). Errors in
short-term memory for good and poor readers. Memory &
Cognition, 15, 444-453.

Crowder, R. G. (1982). The demise of short-term memory.
Acta Psychologica, 50, 291-323.

Cunningham, T. F., Healy, A. F., & Kent, P. (1989,
November). Reading ability and plwnetic short-term memory
in second graders. Paper presented at the 30th Annual
Meeting of the Psychonomic Society, Atlanta, Georgia.

Estes, W. K. (1972). An associative basis for coding and
organization in memory. In A. W. Melton & E. Martin
(Eds.), Coding processes in human memory (pp. 161-190).
Washington, DC: Winston.

Healy, A. F. (1974). Separating item from order
information in short-term memory. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 13, 644-655.

Healy, A. F. (1975a). Short-term retention of temporal and
spatial order. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 5,
57-58.

Healy, A. F. (1975b). Coding of temporal-spatial patterns
in short-term memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 14, 481-495.

Healy, A. F. (1977). Pattern coding of spatial order
information in short-term memory. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 16,419-437.

Healy, A. F. (1978). A Markov model for the short-term
retention of spatial location information. Journal
ofVerbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 17,295-308. 154
HEALY ET AL. Healy, A. F. (1982). Short-term memory for
order information. In G. H. Bower (Ed.), The psydwlogy of
learning and motivation (Vol. 16, pp. 191-238). New York:
Academic Press. Hitch, G. J., Woodin, M. E., & Baker, S.
(1989). Visual and phonological components of working
memory in children. Memory & Cognition, 17, 175-185. Iowa
Test of Basic Skills. (1985). Chicago, IL: Riverside
Publishing. Katz, R B., Healy, A. F., & Shankweiler, D.
(1983). Phonetic coding and order memory in relation to
reading proficiency: A comparison of short-term memory for
temporal and spatial order information. Applied
Psycholinguistics, 4, 229-250. Metcalfe, J., Glavanov,
D., & Murdock, M. (1981). Spatial and temporal processing
in the auditory and visual modalities. Memory &
Cognition, 9, 351-359. Murdock, B. B. (1969). Where or
when: Modality effects as a function of temporal and
spatial distribution of information. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 8, 378-383. Murdock, B. B.
(1976).1tem and order information in short-term serial
memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 105,
191-216. Murdock, B. B. (in press). Serial organization
in a distributed memory model. In A. F. Healy, S.M.
Kosslyn, & R. M. Shiffrin (Eds.), From learning theory to
cognitive processes: Essays in honor ofW. K. Estes.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. O'Connor, N.,
& Hermelin, B. M. (1973). The spatial or temporal
organization of short-term mem01y. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 25,335-343. Till, R. E., Healy,
A. F., Bourne, L. E., & Cunningham, T. F. (1986,
August).Age differences in item, temporal, and spatial
short-term memory. Paper presented at the 94th Annual
Convention of the American Psychological Association,
Washington, DC.
9 On Types of Item Coding and Sources of
Recall in Short-Term Memory

Atkinson, R. C., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1968). Hwnan memory: A
proposed system and its control processes. In K. W.
Spence, & J. T. Spence (Eds.), The psychology of learning
and motivation: Advances in research and theory (pp.
89-105). New York: Academic Press.

Baddeley, A D. (1976). The psychology of memory. New York:
Basic Books.

Bernbach, H. A. (1970). A multiple-copy model
forpostperceptual memory. In D. A Norman (Ed.), Models of
human memory (pp. 103-116). New York: Academic Press.

Bjork, E. L., & Healy, A F. (1974). Short-term order and
item retention. Journal ofVerbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 13, 80-97.

Bjork, R. A. (1970). Retention and rehearsal mechanisms for
short-term memory. In D. A. Norman (Ed.), Models of human
memory (pp. 307-330). New York: Academic Press.

Brown, J. (1958). Some tests of the decay theory of
immediate memory. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 10, 12-21.

Conrad, R. (1964). Acoustic confusions in immediate memory.
British Journal of Psychology, 55,75-84.

Drewnowski, A. (1980). Attributes and priorities in
short-term recall: A new model of memory span. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 109, 208-250.

Estes, W. K. (1972). An associative basis for coding and
organization in memory. In A. W. Melton, & E. Martin
(Eds.), Coding processes in human memory (pp. 161-190).
Washington, DC: Winston.

Estes, W. K. (1973). Phonemic coding and rehearsal in
short-term memory for letter strings. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 12,360-372.

Estes, W. K. (1986). Array models for category learning.
Cognitive Psychology, 18,500-549.

Grossberg, ..... (1987). Competitive learning: From
interactive activation to adaptive resonance. Cognitive
Science, 11, 23-63.
Healy, A. F. (1974). Separating item from order
information in short-term memory. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 13, 644-655.

Healy, A. F. (1975). Coding of temporal-spatial patterns
in short-term memory. Journal of Verbal Learning andVerbal
Behavior, 14,481-495.

Johnson, R. E. (1980). Memory-based rehearsal. In G. H.
Bower (Ed.), The psychology of learning and motivation:
Advances in research and theory (pp. 263-307). New York:
Academic Press.

Medin, D. L., & Schaffer, M. M. (1978). Context theory of
classification learning. Psychological Review, 85,207-238.

Morton, J. (1970). Afunctional model for memory. InD. A.
Norman (Ed.),Models of human memory (pp. 203-260). New
York: Academic Press. 172 ESTES Murdock, B. B., Jr.
(1961). The retention of individual items. Journal of
Experimental Psyclwlogy, 62,618-625. Murdock, B. B., Jr.
(1982). A theory for the storage and retrieval of item and
associative information. Psychological Review, 89,
609-626. Nosofsky, R M. (1984). Choice, similarity, and
the context theory of classification. Journal of
Experimental Psyclwlogy: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition,JO, 104-114. Peterson, L R., & Johnson, S. T.
(1971). Some effects of minimizing articulation on
short-term retention. Journal ofVerbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior,JO, 346-354. Raaijmakers, J. G. W., & Shiffrin,
R. M. (1981). Search of associative memocy. Psyclwlogical
Review, 88,93-134. Ratcliff, R. (1978). A theory of
memory retrieval. Psyclwlogical Review, 85, 59-108.
Wickelgren, W. A. (1967). Rehearsal grouping and
hierarchical organization of serial position cues in
short-term memory. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psyclwlogy, 19,97-102. Woodward, A. E. J., Bjork, R. A.,
& Jongeward, R.N. (1973). Recall and recognition as a
function of primary rehearsal. Journal of Verbal Learning
and Verbal Behavior,12, 608-617. APPENDIX A MElliOD FOR
SHORT-TERM RECALL EXPERIMENT Design The stimulus set
comprised 72 five-consonant lists. The consonants were
sampled randomly from the set of 20 English consonants
with the following constraints: 1. No consonant was
repeated in a list. 2. No occurrences of sequences of
consonants adjacent in the alphabet (e.g., BC or TS) were
allowed. 3. For half of the lists (denoted Disjoint), the
list presented on a given trial contained no items in
common with the list of the preceding trial. For the other
half (denoted Overlap), the list presented on a given
trial had exactly three items in common with the list of
the preceding trial. The positions of Overlap items were
selected randomly with the constraint that all positions
be used with as nearly equal frequency as possible;
actually, over the 36 Overlap lists, the first, third, and
fifth items were repeated 22 times and the second and
fourth 21 times. Positions of Overlap items on successive
trials were independent in the sense that an Overlap item
occurring in a given position on trial n was equally likely
to occur in any of the five positions on trial n+ 1. The
72 lists were divided into three equal subsets, assigned to
the three test conditions, denoted Immediate, Filled
Delay, and Rehearsal, with Disjoint and Overlap items
equally represented in each subset 9. SOURCES OF RECALL
173

Subjects and Apparatus

Subjects were 16 college-age students, paid for their
service. The experiment was

conducted in an isolated room with the subject seated
facing a TRS-80 microcom

puter screen, on which stimulus displays appeared, at a
viewing distance of

approximately 45 em. Characters displayed on the screen
were 7 mm high and

6mm wide.

Procedure

The following sequence of events occurred on each
experimental trial.

1. The subject initiated the trial when ready by pressing
the space bar on the

computer keyboard.

2. A Ready cue (* ! ! *) appeared in the center of the
screen for 1 s, followed by

a .25 s blank interval.

3. The five consonants of the stimulus set were displayed
successively at the
location of the first ! in the Ready cue, each being on for
.25 s and off for .25 s.

They were read aloud by the subject.

4. A sequence of six random digits appeared, at the same
location as the conso

nants, each on for .25 sand off for .25 s. They were read
aloud by the subject.

5. A cue was displayed for one of the three test
conditions: * ?? * for Immediate recall ( LA ) for Filled
Delay REPEA. T for Rehearsal

The Filled Delay and Rehearse cues were on for .75 sand
off for .25 s, following

which five+ signs were displayed sequentially in the center
of the screen, each on

for .25 sand off for .25 s, as a means of timing the
subjects' vocalizations. In the

Filled Delay condition, the subject pronounced "Ia" to
each + mark, and in the

Rehearsal condition the subject pronounced the consonants
of the stimulus set,

saying "blank" whenever he or she could not remember an
item. Subjects' rehears

als were recorded on a cassette player controlled by the
computer. After the five

+signs, six random digits were displayed sequentially in
the center of the screen,

again on for .25 s and off for .25 s and read aloud by the
subject, following which

the same recall cue as for the Immediate condition
appeared. Recall responses were entered in a 72-page
booklet. Each page displayed a

row of five blocks, and subjects were instructed to recall
the list by writing a single
letter in each of the five blocks, preserving the
positions of the letters as they had

appeared in the stimulus list and guessing when necessary.
Subjects were reminded

that consonants were never repeated within a list. Each
subject took part in two sessions. The first session began
with reading of

the instructions followed by 16 practice trials and then
the 72 experimental trials.

The second session included only 72 experimental trials.
The experimental trials

of the two sessions constituted complete replications of
the design except that there

were two random ordering$ of the lists, each a<>signed to
half of the subjects in each

session in a counterbalanced order.
10 Phonological Memory and Serial Order:
A Sandwich for TODAM

Atkinson, R C., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1968). Hwnan memory: A
proposed system and its control processes. InK. W. Spence
(Ed.), The psychology of learning and motivation: Advances
in research and theory, Vol. 2 (pp. 89-195). New York:
Academic Press.

Baddeley, A. D. (1966). Short-term memory for word
sequences as a iimction of acoustic, semantic and formal
similarity. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
18, 362-365.

Baddeley, A. D. (1968). How does acoustic similarity
influence short-term memory? Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 20,249-264.

Baddeley, A. D., & Hitch, G. (1974). Working memory. In G.
A. Bower (Ed.), Recent advances in learning and
motivation, Vol. 8 (pp. 47-90). New York: Academic Press.

Baddeley, A. D., Lewis, V. J., & Vallar, G. (1984).
Exploring the articulatory loop. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 36, 233-252.

Baddeley, A. D., & Lieberman, K. (1980). Spatial working
memory. In R. S. Nickerson (Ed.), Attention and
performance Vl/1 (pp. 521-539). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbawn Associates.

Baddeley, A. D., & Wilson, B. A. (1988). Comprehension and
working memory: A single case study. Journal of Memory
and Language, 27,479-498.

Baddeley, A. D., Papagno, C., & Vallar, G. (1988). When
long term learning depends on short-term storage. Journal
of Memory and Language, 27, 586-595.

Baddeley, A. D., Thomson, N., & Buchanan, M. (1975). Word
length and the structure of short-term memory. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior,l4, 515-589.

Basso, A., Spinnler, H., Vallar, G., & Zanobio, E. (1982).
Left hemisphere damage and selected impairment of
auditory verbal short-term memory: A case study.
Neuropsychologia, 20, 263-274.

Butterworth, B., Campbell, R. & Howard, D. (1986). The
uses of short-term memory: A case study. Quarterly Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 38A , 705-738.

Colle, H. A. (1980). Auditory encoding in visual short-term
recall: Effects of noise intensity and spatial location.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior,J9, 722-735.
10. A SANDWICH FOR TODAM 193

Colle, H. A., & Welsh, A (1976). Acoustic masking in
primary memory. Journal o[Verbal

Learning and Verbal Behavior,l5, 17-32.

Conrad, R (1960). Serial order intrusions in immediate
memory. British Journal of Psychol

ogy, 51,45-48.

Conrad, R., & Hull, A. J. (1964). Information, acoustic
confusion and memory span. British

Journal of Psychology, 55,429-432.

Craik, F. I. M., & Lockhart, R S. (1972). Levels of
processing: A framework for memory

research. Journal of Verbal Learning andVerbal Behavior,
11, 671-684.

Drewnowski, A (1980). Attributes and priorities in
short-term recall: A new model of

memory span. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General,109, 208-250.

Ebbinghaus, H. (1885). Uber dJJs Gediichtnis. Leipzig:
Dunker. Translation by H. Ruyer and

C. E. Bussenius, Memory. New York: Teachers College,
Columbia University, 1913.

Gathercole, S. & Baddeley, A D. (1989). Evaluation of the
role of phonological STM in the

development of vocabulary in children: A longitudinal
study. Journal of Memory and

Language,28,200-213.

Gathercole, S. & Baddeley, A D. (in press a). Phonological
memory deficits in language
disordered children: Is there a causal connection? Journal
of Memory and Language.

Gathercole, S. & Baddeley, A D. (in press b). The role of
phonological memory in

vocabulary acquisition: A study of young children learning
new names. British Journal

of Psychology.

Hanley, J. R, & Broadbent, C. (1987). The effect of
unattended speech on serial recall

following auditory presentation. British Journal of
Psychology, 78,287-298.

Hitch, G. J. (1975). The role of attention in visual and
auditory suffix effects. Memory &

Cognition, 3, 501-505.

Horowitz, L. M. (1962). Associative matching and intralist
similarity. Psychological Re

ports,JO, 751-757.

Kahneman, D. (1973). Attention and Effort. Englewood
Oiffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Kolers, P. A. (1979). A pattern-analyzing basis of
recognition. In L. S. Cermak & F. I. M.

Craik (Eds.), Levels of processing in human memory (pp.
363-384). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Lee, C. L. & Estes, W. K. (1977). Order and position in
primary memory for letter strings.

Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior,l6, 395-418.

Lewandowsk:y, S. & Murdock, B. B. (1989). Memory for
serial order. Psychological Review,

96,25-51.

Murdock, B. B. (1987). Serial-a:der effects in a
distributed memory model. In D. S. Gorfein & R. R. Hoffman
(Eds.), Memory and learning: The Ebbinghaus centennial
conference (pp. 277-310). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.

194 BADDELEY, PAPAGNO, AND NORRIS

Murray, D. J. (1968). Articulation and acoustic
confusability in short-term memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 78, 679-684.

Papagno, C., Baddeley, A. D. & Valentine, T. (1989).
Memoria fonologica a breve tennine e apprendimento verbal
e. Archivio di PsicologiaNeurologia e Psichiatria, 3,
542-557.

Papagno, C., Valentine, T. & Baddeley, A. D. (in press).
Phonological short-term memory and foreign-language
vocabulary learning. Journal of Memory and Language.

Rumelhart, D. E., & McClelland, J. L. (Eds.) (1986).
Parallel distributed processing: Explorations in the
microstructures of cognition, Vol. I: Foundations.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Salame, P., & Baddeley, A D. (1982). Disruption of
short-term memory by unattended speech: Implications for
the structure of working memory. Journal ofVerbal Learning
andVerbal Behavior, 21, 150-164.

Salame, P., & Baddeley, A. D. (1986). Phonological factors
in S1M: Similarity and the unattended speech effect.
Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 24,263-265.

Salame, P. & Baddeley, A. D. (1987). Noise, unattended
speech and short-term memory. Ergonomics, 30, 1185-1193.

Service, E. (1989). Phonological coding in working memory
andforeign-langauge learning (General Psychology
Monographs No. B9). Helsinki: University of Helsinki.

Shallice, T. (1988). From neuropsychology to mental
structure. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Shallice, T., & Warrington, E. K. (1970). Independent
fimctioning of verbal memory stores: A neuropsychological
study. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 22,
261-273.

Shiffrin, R. M. & Cook, J. R. (1978). Short-term forgetting
of item and order information. Journal of Verbal Learning
and Verbal Behavior, 17, 189-218.
Vallar, G. & Shallice, T. (Eds.) (1990). Neurological
impairments of short-term memory. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Wickelgren, W. A (1969). Context-sensitive coding,
associative memory, serial order in (speech) behavioc.
Psychological Review, 76, 1-15.
11 Peace Pipes Round the TODAM Pole: A
Puff for Short-Term Memory

Heron, A., & Craik, F.l. M. (1964). Age differences in
cwnulative learning of meaningful and meaningless
material. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 5, 209-217.

l...ewandowsky, S., & Murdock, B. B. (1989). Memory for
serial order. Psychological Review, 96, 25-57.

Monsell, S. ( 1984 ). Components of working memory
Wlderlying verbal skills: A "distributed capacities" view.
In H. Bouma & D. G. Bouwhuis (Eds.),Attention and
performance X (pp. 327-350). London: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.

Murdock, B. B., Jr. (1960). The distinctiveness of
stimuli. Psychological Review, 67,16-31.

Murdock, B. B., Jr. (1974). Human memory: Theory and data.
Potomac, MD: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Reisberg, D., Rappaport, 1., & O'Shaughnessy, M. (1984).
Limits of working memory: The digit digit-span. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition,JO, 203-221.

Service, E. (1989). Phonological coding in working memory
and foreign-language learning. University of Helsinki,
General Psychology Monographs, No. B9.

Till, R. E., Healy, A. F., Bourne, L. E., & CWlningham, T.
F. (1986, August). Age differences in item, temporal, and
spatial short-term memory. Paper presented at the 94th
Annual Convention of the American Psychological
Association, Washington, DC.

Woodward, A. E., Jr., Bjork, R. A., & Jongeward, R. H.
(1973). Recall and recognition as a function of primary
rehearsal. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior,J2, 608-617.
12 Your Face Looks Familiar but I Can't
Remember Your Name: A Review of Dual
Process Theory

Atkinson, R C., Herrmann, D. J., & Wescourt, K. T. (1974).
Search processes in recognition memory. In R. L. Solso
(Ed.), Theories in cognitive psychology: The Loyola
Symposium (pp. 101-146). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Eclbaum
Associates.

Atkinson, R C., & Juola, J. F. (1973). Factors influencing
speed and accuracy of word recognition. InS. Kornblum
(Ed.), Attention and performance: W (pp. 583-612). New
York: Academic Press.

Atkinson, R. C., & Juola, J. F. (1974). Search and
decision processes in recognition memory. In D. H. Krantz,
R. C. Atkinson, & R D. Luce (Eds.), Contemporary
developments in mathematical psychology (Volume 1.
Learning, memory, and thinking) (pp. 243-293). San
Francisco: Freeman.

Darley, C. F., & Murdock, B. B. Jr. (1971). Fffects of
prior free-recall testing on final recall and recognition.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 91, 66-73.

Dorfman, J., & Mandler, G. (1991). Implicit and explicit
forgetting: When is gist remembered? Manuscript in
preparation.

Forster, K. I. (1985). Lexical acquisition and the modular
lexicon. Language and Cognitive Processes, 2, 87-108.

Graf, P., & Mandler, G. (1984). Activation makes words more
accessible, but not necessarily more retrievable. Journal
of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 23,553-568.

Graf, P., Mandler, G., & Haden, P. (1982). Simulating
amnesic symptoms in normal subjects. Science,218,
1243-1244.

Graf, P., Squire, L. R., & Mandler, G. (1984). The
information that amnesic patients do not forget Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
10, 164-178.

Gronlund, S. D., & Ratcliff, R. (1989). Tune course of
item and associative information: Implications for global
memory models. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 15, 846-848.
Hashtroudi, S., Ferguson, S. A., Rappold, V. A., &
Chrosniak, L. D. (1988). Data-driven and conceptually
driven processes in partial-word identification and
recognition. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 14, 7 49-757.

Hayman, C. A. G. & Tulving, E. (1989). Contingent
dissociation between recognition and fragment completion:
The method of triangulation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 15,228-240.

Herrmann, D., Frisina, R. D., & Conti, G. (1978).
Categorization and familiarity in recognition involving a
well-memorized list. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Learning and Memory, 4, 428-440.

Hintzman, D. L., & Hartry, A. L. (1990). Item effects in
recognition and fragment completion: Contingency relations
vary for different subsets of words .Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
16,955-969. 222 MANDLER Hirst, W., Johnson, M. K.,
Phelps, E. A., & Volpe, B. T. (1988). More on recognition
and recall in amnesics. Journal of Experimental
Psyclwlogy: U!aming, Memory, and Cognition, 14, 758-762.
Jacoby, L. L., & Dallas, M. (1981). On the relationship
between autobiographical memory and perceptual learning.
Journal of Experimental Psyclwlogy: General, 110, 306-340.
Jacoby, L. L. & Whitehouse, K. (1989). An illusion of
memory: False recognition influenced by unconscious
perception. Journal of Experimental Psyclwlogy: General,
118, 126-135. Jacoby, L. L. , & Witherspoon, D. (1982).
Remembering without awareness. Canadian Journal of
Psyclwlogy, 36, 300-324. Jacoby, L. L., Woloshyn, V., &
Kelley, C. (1989). Becoming famous without being
recognized: Unconscious influences of memory produced by
dividing attention. Journal of Experimental Psyclwlogy:
General, 118, 115-125. Johnson, M. K., & Kim, J. K.
(1985). Recognition of pictures by alcoholic Korsakoff
patients. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 23,456-458.
Juola, J. F., Fischler, 1., Wood, C. T., & Atkinson, R. C.
(1971). Recognition time for information stored in
long-term memory. Perception & Psyclwphysics, 10, 8-14.
Kintsch, W. (1967). Memory and decision aspects of
recognition learning. Psyclwlogical Review, 74,496-504.
Kintsch, W. (1968). Recognition and free recall of
organized lists. Journal of Experimenlal Psyclwlogy,
78,481-487. Mandler, G. (1967). Organization and memory.
InK. W. Spence & J. T. Spence (Eds.), The psyclwlogy of
learning and motivation: Advances in research and theory,
Vol. 1 (pp. 328-372). New York: Academic Press. Mandler,
G. (1968). Organized recall: Individual functions.
Psychonomic Science, 13, 235-236. Mandler, G. (1970).
Words, lists, and categories: An experimental view of
organized memory. In J. L. Cowan (Ed.), Studies in
tlwught and language (pp. 99-131). Tucson: University of
Arizona Press. Mandler, G. (1972). Organization and
recognition. In E. Tulving & W. Donaldson (Eds.),
Organization and memory (pp. 139-166). New York: Academic
Press. Mandler, G. (1977). Commentary on "Organization
and memory." In G. H. Bower (Ed.), Human memory: Basic
processes (pp. 297 -308). New York: Academic Press.
Mandler, G. (1979). Organization and repetition:
Organizational principles with special reference to rote
learning. In L.-G. Nilsson (Ed.), Perspectives on memory
research (pp. 293-327). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates. Mandler, G. (1980). Recognizing: The judgment
of previous occurrence. Psyclwlogical Review, 87,
252-271. 12. DUAL PROCESS THEORY 223

Mandler, G. (1981). The recognition of previous encounters.
American Scientist, 69, 211-218.

Mandler, G. (1989). Memory: Conscious and unconscious. In
P. R Solomon, G. R Goethals, C. M. Kelley, & B. R.
Stephens (Eds.), Memory: Interdisciplinary approaches (pp.
84106). New York: Springer Verlag.

Mandler, G., & Barsalou, L. W. (1979). Steady state
memory: What does the one-shot experiment assess?
(Technical Report No. 84 ). San Diego: Center for Hwnan
Information Processing, University of California.

Mandler, G., & Boeck, W. (1974 ). Retrieval processes in
recognition. Memory & Cognition, 2, 613-615.

Mandler, G., Goodman, G. 0., & Wilkes-Gibbs, D. (1982).
The word frequency paradox in recognition. Memory &
Cognition, 10, 33-42.

Mandler, G., Graf, P., & Kraft, D. (1986). Activation and
elaboration effects in recognition and word priming.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 38A, 645-662.

Mandler, G., Hamson, C. Overson, & Dorfman, J. (1990).
Tests of dual process theory: Word priming and
recognition. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
42A, 713739.

Mandler, G., Pearlstone, Z., & Koopmans, H. J. (1969).
Effects of organization and semantic similarity on recall
and recognition. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 8, 410-423.

Mandler, G., & Rabinowitz, J. C. (1981). Appearance and
reality: Does a recognition test really improve subsequent
recall and recognition? Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Humon Learning and Memory, 7, 79-90.

Mandler, G., Rabinowitz, J. C., & Simon, R. A. (1981).
Coordinate c:xganization: The holistic representation of
word pairs. American Journal of Psychology, 94, 209-222.

Murdock, B. B. Jr. (1968). Modality effects in short-term
memory: Storage or retrieval? Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 77, 79-86.

Murdock, B. B. Jr. (1982). A theory for the storage and
retrieval of item and associative information.
Psychological Review, 89, 609-626.

Murdock, B. B. Jr., & Dufty, P. 0. (1972). Strength theory
and recognition memory. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 94,284-290.

Muller, G. E. (1913). Analyse der Gedachtnistatigkeit und
des Vorstellungsverlaufes, ill. Teil. Zeitschrift for
Psychologie, Ergiinzungsband 8.

Neely, J.H., & Durgunoglu, A. (1985). Orthographic priming
and recall vs. recognition dependencies in word-fragment
completion. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 23,293.

Nelson, D. L., Canas, J. J., Bajo, M. T., & Keelan, P. D.
(1987). Comparing word fragment completion and cued
recall. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 13, 542-552. 224 MANDLER Overson,
C., Mandler, G. (1987).1ndirect word priming in connected
semantic and phonological contexts. Bulletin of the
Psyclwnomic Society, 25,229-232. Perruchet, P. (1988).
L'apprentissage sans conscience: Donnees empiriques et
implications theoriques.ln P. Perruchet (Ed.), Les
automatismes cognitifs. Liege: Mardaga. Rabinowitz, J.
C., Mandler, G., & Barsalou, L W. (1977). Recognition
failure: Another case of retrieval failure. Journal of
Verbal Learning andVerbal Behavior, 16, 639-663.
Rabinowitz, J. C., Mandler, G., & Barsalou, L W. (1979).
Generationrecognition as an auxiliary retrieval stratef:j
.Journal ofVerbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 18, 57-12.
Rabinowitz, J. C., Mandler, G., & Patterson, K. E. (1977
a). Determinants of recognition and recall: Accessibility
and generation. Journal of Experimental Psyclwlogy:
General, 106, 302-329. Rabinowitz, J. C., Mandler, G., &
Patterson, K. E. (1977b). Clarifications, refutations and
resolutions. Journal of Experimental Psyclwlogy: General,
106, 336-340. Schwartz, B. (1988). Data-driven and
conceptual processes in priming as measured by
word-completion and perceptual identification. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, University of Toronto. Shallice,
T. (1987). Impairments of semantic processing: Multiple
dissociations. In M. Coltheart, G. Sartori, & R Job
(Eds.), The cognitive neuropsychology of language (pp.
111-127). London: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Shimamura,
A. P. (1985). Problems with the finding of stochastic
independence as evidence for the independence of cognitive
processes. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 23,
506-508. Smith, M. E., & Halgren, E. (1989). Dissociation
of recognition memory following temporal lobe lesions.
Journal of Experimental Psyclwlogy: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 15,50-60. Squire, L. R, Shimamura, A. P., &
Graf, P. (1985). Independence of recognition memory and
priming effects: A neuropsychological analysis. Journal of
Experimental Psyclwlogy: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition,ll, 37-44. Tulving, E., Schacter, D. L, &
Stark, H. A. (1982). Priming effects in word-fragment
completion are independent of recognition memory. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 8, 336-342. Tulving, E., & Thomson, D. M.
(1973). Encoding specificity and retrieval processes in
episodic memory. Psyclwlogical Review, 80, 352-373.
Warrington, E. K., & McCarthy, R A. (1987). The
fractionation of retrograde amnesia. Unpublished
manuscript. Warrington, E. K., Weiskrantz, L (1970).
Amnesia: Consolidation or retrieval? Nature, 228, 628-630.
Warrington, E. K., & Weiskrantz, L (1974). The effect of
prior learning on subsequent retention in amnesic
patients. Neuropsychologia, 12, 419-428. 12. DUAL PROCESS
THEORY 225

Warrington, E. K., & Weiskrantz, L. (1978). Further
analysis of the prior learning effect in amnesic patients.
Neuropsyclwlogia,16, 169-177.

Witherspoon, D., & Moscovitch, M. (1989). Stochastic
independence between two implicit memory tasks. Journal of
Experimental Psyclwlogy: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
iS, 23-30.
13 Recognition Memory for Item and
Associative Information: A Comparison of
Forgetting Rates

Anderson, J. R., & Bower, G. H. (1972). Recognition and
retrieval processes in free recall. Psychological Review,
79,97-123.

Bain, J.D., & Humphreys, M.S. (1988). Relational context:
Independent cues, meanings, or configurations? In G. M.
Davies & D. M. Thompson (Eds.), Memory in context: Context
in memory, London: Wiley.

Begg, I. (1978). Imagery and ocganization in memory:
Instructional effects. Memory & Cognition, 6, 174-183.

Clark, S. E., & Fitzwater, M. K. (1989, November).
Reversal of the word frequency effect. Paper presented at
the 30th Annual Meeting of the Psychonomics Society,
Atlanta.

Dosher, B. A. (1988). Retrieval dynamics of item and
associative information. Unpublished manuscript

Eich, J. M. (1985). Levels of processing, encoding
specificity, elaboration, and CHARM. Psychological Review,
92, 1-38.

Friendly, M., Franklin, P. E., Hoffman, E., & Rubin, D. C.
(1982). The Toronto word pool: Norms for imagery,
concreteness, orthographic variables, and grammatical usage
for 1,080 words. Behavior Research Methods &
Instrumentation, 14, 375-399.

Gillund, G., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1984). A retrieval model
for both recognition and recall. Psychological Review, 91,
1-67.

Glanzer, M., & Adams, J. K. (1990). The mirror effect in
recognition memory: Data and theory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
16, 5-16.

Gronlund, S. D., & Ratcliff, R. (1989). Tune course of
item and associative information: Implications for global
memory models. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 15,846-858.

Hintzman, D. L. (1969). Recognition time: Fffects of
recency, frequency, and the spacing of repetitions.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 79, 192-194.

Hintzman, D. L. (1984). MINERVA 2: A simulation model of
human memory. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, and
Computers, 16,96-101.

Hintzman, D. L. (1986). "Schema abstraction" in a
multiple-trace memory model. Psychological Review,
93,411-428.

Hintzman, D. L. (1988). Judgments of frequency
andrecognitionmemory in a multiple-trace memory model.
Psychological Review, 95,528-551.

Hockley, W. E. (1982). Retrieval processes in continuous
recognition. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 8, 497-512.

Hockley, W. E., & Murdock, B. B., Jr. (1987). A decision
model for accuracy and response latency in recognition
memory. Psychological Review, 94,341-358. 248 HOCKLEY
Hwnphreys, M. S. (1976). Relational information and the
context effect in recognition memory. Memory & Cognition,
4, 221-232. Hwnphreys, M. S. (1978). Item and relational
information: A case for context independent retrieval.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior,l7, 175-187.
Hwnphreys, M. S., & Bain, J. D. (1983). Recognition
memory: A cue and information analysis. Memory &
Cognition,ll, 583-600. Hwnphreys, M.S., Pike, R, Bain,
J.D., & Tehan, G. (1989). Global matching: A comparison of
SAM, MINFRVA 2, Matrix, and TODAM models. Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 33, 36-37. Kucera, H., &
Francis, W. (1967). Computational analysis of present-day
American English. Providence, RI: Brown University Press.
Mandler, G. (1980). Recognizing: The judgment of previous
occurrence. Psychological Review, 87,252-271. Mandler,
G., Pearlstone, Z., & Koopmans, H. J. (1969). Effects of
organization and semantic similarity on recall and
recognition. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 8,410-423. McGee, R. (1980). Imagery and
recognition memory: The effects of relational organization.
Memory & Cognition, 8, 394-399. Murdock, B. B., Jr.
(1974). Human memory: Theory and data. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Murdock, B. B., Jr. (1982).
A theory for the storage and retrieval of item and
associative information. Psychological Review, 8,
609-626. Murdock, B. B., & Hockley, W. E. (1989).
Short-term memory for associations. fu G. H. Bower (Ed.),
The psychology of learning and motivation, Volume 24 (pp.
71-108). San Diego: Academic Press. Ogilvie, J. C., &
Creelman, C. D. (1968). Maximwn-likelihood estimation of
receiver operator characteristic curve parameters.
Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 5, 377-391. Pike, R.
(1984). A comparison of convolution and matrix distributed
memory systems. Psychological Review, 91,281-294.
Rabinowitz, J. C., Mandler, G., & Barsalou, L. W. (1977).
Recognition failure: Another case of retrieval failure.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 16,
639-663. Ratcliff, R, & Murdock, B. B., Jr. (1976).
Retrieval processes in recognition memory. Psychological
Review, 83,190-214.
14 Bias and Discrimination in Cuing of
Memory: A Weighted Decisions Model

Algarabel, S., Pitarque, A., & Soler, M. J. (1988).
Additivity from multiple primes in identifying backward
written words. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 66, 715-721.

Anderson, J. R (1976). Language, memory, and tlwught. New
York: Halsted Press.

Becker, C. A. (1980). Semantic context effects in visual
word recognition: An analysis of semantic strategies.
Memory & Cognition, 8, 493-512.

Biederman, 1., & Cooper, E. (1990). Evidence that
intermediate translationally invariant representations
mediate visual object recognition. Investigative
Ophthalmology and Visual Science, ARVO Supplement, 525.

Bjork, R. A., & Richardson-K.lavehn, A. (1989). On the
puzzling relationship between environmental context and
human memory. In C. Izawa (Ed.), Current issues in
cognitive processes: The Tulane Floweree symposium on
cognition (pp. 313-344). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.

Carroll, M., & Kirsner, K. (1982). Context repetition
effects in lexical decision and recognition memory.
Journal ofVerbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 15,657-668.

Collins, A.M., & Loftus, E. F. (1975). A spreading
activation theory of semantic processing. Psyclwlogical
Review, 82,407-428.

DeGroot, A., Thomassen, A., & Hudson, P. (1982).
Associative facilitation of word recognition as measured
from a neutral prime. Memory & Cognition, 10, 358-370.

Den Heyer, K., Goring, A., & Dannenbring, G. L (1985).
Semantic priming and word repetition: The two effects are
additive. Journal of Memory and Language, 24, 699-716.

Dosher, B. (1984 ). Discriminating preexperimental
(semantic) from experimental (episodic) associations: A
speed accuracy analysis. Cognitive Psyclwlogy, 16,
519-555.

Dosher, B., & Rosedale, G. (1989). Integrated retrieval
cues as a mechanism for priming in retrieval from memory.
Journal of Experimental Psyclwlogy: General, 16,519-555.
Dosher, B., & Rosedale, G. (in press). Judgments of
semantic and episodic relatedness: Common time-course and
segregation failure. Journal of Memory and Language.

Dosher, B., McElree, B., Hood, R. M., & Rosedale, G.
(1989). Retrieval dynamics of priming in recognition
memory: Bias and discrimination analyses. Journal of
Experimental Psyclwlogy: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
15,868-886.

Eich, J. M. (1982). A composite holographic associative
recall modei.Psyclwlogical Review, 89,627-661.

Farah, M. (1989). Semantic and perceptual priming: How
similar are the underlying mechanisms? Journal of
Experimental Psyclwlogy: Human Perception and
Performance,15, 188-194.

Gillund, G., & Shiffrin, R M. (1984). A retrieval model
for both recognition and recall. Psyclwlogical Review,
91,1-67. 276 DOSHER Hintzman, D. L. (1986). Schema
abstraction in a multiple-trace memory model. Psychological
Review, 93,411-428. Hintzman, D. L. (1988). Judgments of
frequency and recognition memory in a multiple-trace
memory model. Psychological Review, 95, 528-551. Hockley,
W. E., & Murdock, B. B. (1987). A decision model for
accuracy and response latency in recognition memory.
Psychological Review, 94, 341-358. Humphreys, M. S.
(1976). Relational information and the context effect in
recognition memory. Memory & Cognition, 4, 221-232.
Humphreys, M. S. (1978). Item and relational information:
A case for context independent retrieval. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 17, 175-187.
Humphreys, M. S., Bain, J. D., & Pike, R (1989). Different
ways to cue a coherent memory system. Psychological
Review, 96, 208-233. Humphreys, M.S., Pike, R., Bain,
J.D., & Tehan, G. (1989). Global matching: A comparison of
SAM, Minerva ll, Matrix, and TODAM models. Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 33,36-67. Johns, E. E. ( 1985).
Effects of list organization on item recognition. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 11, 605-620. Johnston, J. C., & Hale, B. L.
(1984). The influence of prior context on word
identification: Bias and sensitivity effects. In H. Bouma
& D.G. Bouwhuis (Eds.), Attention and Performance X:
Control of language processes (pp. 243-255). Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Lewandowsky, S. (1986).
Priming in recognition memory for categorized lists.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 12, 562-574. Lewandowsky, S., &Murdock, B. B.
(1989). Memory for serial order. Psychological Review,
96,25-51. Mandler, G., Rabinowitz, J. C., & Simon, R A
(1981 ). Coordinate ocganization: The holistic
representation of word pairs. American Journal of
Psychology, 94, 209-222. Masson, M. E. J., & Freedman, L.
(1990). Fluent identification of repeated words. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 16, 355-373. McElree, B., & Dosher, B. (1990).
[Priming in categorized list structures.] Unpublished raw
data. Meyer, D. E., & Schvaneveldt, R W. (1971).
Facilitation in recognizing pairs of words: Evidence of a
dependence between retrieval operations. Journal of
Experimental Psychology,90,221-243. Meyer, D. E., Yantis,
S., Osman, A., & Smith, J. E. K. (1984). Discrete versus
continuous models of response preparation: A reaction
time analysis. In S. Kornblum & J. Requin (Eds.),
Preparatory states and processes (pp. 69-94). Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 14. WEIGHTED DECISIONS
MODEL 277

Morton, J. (1969). Interaction of information in word
recognition. Psychological Review, 76, 165-178.

Murdock, B. B. (1982). A theory for the storage and
retrieval of item and associative information.
Psychological Review, 89, 609-626.

Murdock, B. B. (1983). A distributed memory model for
serial-order information. Psychological Review, 89,
316-338.

Neely, J. H. (1977). Semantic priming and retrieval from
lexical memory: Roles of inhibitionless spreading
activation and limited capacity attention. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 106,226-254.

Neely, J. H., & Durgunoglu, A Y. (1985). Dissociative
episodic and semantic priming effects in episodic
recognition and lexical decision tasks. Journal of Memory
and Language, 24,466489.

Neely, J. H., Keefe, D. E., & Ross, K. L (1989). Semantic
priming in the lexical decision task: Roles of
prospective prime-generated expectancies and retrospective
semantic matching. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 15, 1003-1019.

Neely, J. H., Sclunidt, S. R, & Roediger, H. L (1983).
Inhibition from related primes in recognition memory.
Journal of Experimental Psyclwlogy: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition,9, 196-211.

Norris, D. (1986). Word recognition: Context effects
without priming. Cognition,22, 93-136.

Raaijmakers, J. G., & Shiffrin, R M. (1981). Search of
associative memory. Psyclwlogical Review, 88,93-134.

Ratcliff, R (1978). A theory of memory retrieval.
Psychological Review, 85, 59-108.

Ratcliff, R., Clark, S. E., & Shiffrin, R M. (1990).
List-strength effect: I. Data and discussion. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
16, 163-178.

Ratcliff, R., & McKoon, G. (1978). Priming in item
recognition: Evidence for the propositional structure of
sentences. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior,
17, 403417.

Ratcliff, R., & McKoon, G. (1988). A retrieval theory of
priming in memory. Psyclwlogical Review, 95, 385408.

Ratcliff, R., McKoon, G., & Verwoerd, M. (1989). A bias
interpretation of facilitation in perceptual
identification. Journal of Experimental Psyclwlogy:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 15, 378-387.

Reinitz, M. T., Wright, E., & Loftus, G. R (1989). Effects
of semantic priming on visual encoding of pictures.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 118,280-297.

Rosedale, G., & Dosher, B. (1990). Holistic matching in
multi-cue priming of recognition. Manuscript in
preparation. (Based on a dissertation by G. Rosedale.) 278
DOSHER Schacter, D., Cooper, L., & Delaney, S. (1990).
Implicit memory for unfamiliar objects depends on access
to structural descriptions. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 119, 5-24. Schvaneveldt, R. W., &
McDonald, J. E. (1981). Semantic context and the encoding
of words: Evidence for two modes of stimulus analysis.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 7, 673-687. Shaw, M. L. (1980). Identifying
attentional and decision making components in information
processing. In R. S. Nickerson (Ed.), Attention and
Performance VII/ (pp. 277-296). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbawn Associates. Shiffrin, R. M., Ratcliff, R., &
Clark, S. E. (1990). List-strength effect: ll. Theoretical
mechanisms. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 16, 179-195. Smith, S. M. (1988).
Environmental context-dependent memory. In D. M. Thomson &
G. M. Davies (Eds.), Memory in context: Context in
memory. New York: Wiley. Sperling, G., & Dosher, G.
(1986). Strategy and optimization in human information
processing. InK. Boff, L. Kaufman, & J. Thomas (Eds.),
Handbook of perception and performance (pp. 1-66). New
York: Wiley. Swets, J. A. (1984). Mathematical models of
attention. In R. Parasuraman & D. R. Davies (Eds.),
Varieties of attention (pp. 183-242). New York: Academic
Press. Tulving, E. (1983). Elements of episodic memory.
Oxford: Clarendon Press. Weber, E. U., & Murdock, B. B.
(1989). Priming in a distributed memory system:
Implications for models of implicit memory. InS.
Lewandowsky, J. C. Dunn, & K. Kirsner (Eds.), Implicit
Memory: Theoretical Issues (pp. 87-98). Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
15 Using ROC Data and Priming Results to
Test Global Memory Models

Balota, D. A., & Lorch, R. F. (1986). Depth of automatic
spreading activation: Mediated priming effects in
pronunciation but not in lexical decision. Journal of
Experimental Psyclwlogy: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
12,336-345.

Carpenter, G. A., & Grossberg, S. (1987). A massively
parallel architecture for a self-organizing neural pattern
recognition machine. Computer Vision, Graphics, and Image
Processing, 37, 54-115.

Church, K. W. (1988). A stochastic parts program and noun
phrase parser for unrestricted text. In Proceedings of
the second conference on applied natura/language
processing. Austin:ACL

Church, K., & Hanks, P. (1989). Word association norms,
mutual information and lexicography. In Proceedings of the
23rd annual meeting of the association for computational
linguistics, Vancouver: Association for Computational
Linguistics.

de Groot, A.M. B. (1983). The range of automatic spreading
activation in word priming. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 22,417-436.

Dosher, B. A., & Rosedale, G. (1989). Integrated retrieval
cues as a mechanism for priming in retrieval from memory.
Journal of Experimental Psyclwlogy: General, 2, 191-211.
15. GLOBAL MEMORY MODELS 295

Eich, J. M. (1982). A composite holographic associative
recall model. Psychological Review,

89, 627-661.

Gillund, G., & Shiffrin, R M. (1984). A retrieval model
for both recognition and recall.

Psychological Review, 91,1-67.

Green, D. M., & Swets, J. A. (1966). Signal detection
theory and psychophysics. New York:

Kreiger.

Hintzman, D. (1986). "Schema abstraction" in a
multiple-trace memory model. Psychologi

cal Review, 93,411-428.

Hintzman, D. (1988). Judgments of frequency and recognition
memory in a multiple-trace

memory model. Psychological Review, 95, 528-551.

Kortge, C. A. (1990). Episodic memory in connectionist
networks. In The proceedings of

the 12th annual conference of the cognitive science
society. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence

Erlbaum Associates.

Markowitz, J. & Swets, J. A. (1967). Factors affecting the
slope of empirical ROC curves:

Comparison of binary and rating responses. Perception &
Psychophysics, 2, 91-100.

McNamara, T. P., & Altarriba, J. (1988). Depth of
spreading activation revisited: Semantic

mediated priming occurs in lexical decisions. Journal of
Memory and lAnguage, 27,

545-559.

McNicol, D. (1972). A primer of signal detection theory.
London: Allen and Unwin.

Murdock, B. B. (1982). A theory for the storage and
retrieval of item and associative

information. Psychological Review, 89,609-626.

Murdock, B. B. (1983). A distributed memory model for
serial-order information. Psycho

logical Review, 90, 316-338.

Murdock, B. B. Jr., & Dufty, P. 0 . (1972). Strength
theory and recognition memory. Journal

of Experimental Psychology, 94, 284-290.

Murnane, K., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1990).1nterference and the
representation of events in

memory. Manuscript submitted for publication.

Pike, R. (1984). Comparison of convolution and matrix
distributed memory systems for

associative recall and recognition. Psychological Review,
91, 281-294.

Ratcliff, R. (1990). Connectionist models of recognition
memory: Constraints imposed by

learning and fcrgetting functions. Psychological Review,
97, 285-308.

Ratcliff, R., Clark, S. E., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1990). The
list-strength effect: I. Data and

discussion. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition,

16,163-178.

Ratcliff, R., & McKoon, G. (1988). A retrieval theory of
priming in memory. Psychological

Review, 95,385-408.

Ratcliff, R., Sheu, C.-F., & Gronlund, S.D. (1991). Testing
global memory models using

ROC curves. Manuscript submitted for publication.

296 RATCLIFF AND MCKOON

Sheu, C.-F. (1990). A note on the multiple-trace memory
model without simulation. Manuscript submitted for
publication.

Shiffrin, R. M., Ratcliff, R., & Clark, S. E. (1990). The
list strength effect II. Theoretical mechanisms. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 16, 179-195.

Weber, E. U. (1988). Expectation and variance of item
resemblance distributions in a convolution-correlation
model of distributed memory. Journal of Mathematical
Psychology,32,1-43.
Yonelinas, A. P., Hockley, W. E., & Murdock, B. B. (1990).
A demonstration of the list-strength effect in recognition
memory. Manuscript submitted for publication.
17 Episodic and Strength Components in
Recognition Memory

Anderson, J. R. & Bower, G. H. (1973). Human Associative
Memory. Washington D.C.:

Winston & Sons.

Bain, J.D. (1979). Item and relational information in
recognition and recall. Unpublished doctoral dissertation,
The University of Queensland.

Bain, J.D. & Humphreys, M.S. (1988). The relational
context effect: Cues, meanings or configurations. In G.
Davies & D. Thomson (Eds.), Memory in context: Context in

memory (pp. 97-137). London: Wiley.

Bain, J.D., & Humphreys, M.S. (1989). Instructional
reinstatement of context: The forgotten prerequisite.
InK. McConkey and A. Bennett (Eds.), Proceedings of the XXW
Inter

national Congress of Psychology, Vol. 3 (pp. 227-235).
Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Canas, J. J., & Nelson, D. C. (1986). Recognition and
environmental context: The effects of testing by phone.
Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 24,407-409.

Clark, S., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1987). Recognition of
multiple item probes. Memory & Cognition, 15, 367-378.

328 HUMPHREYS AND BAIN

Dyne, A.M., Hwnphreys, M.S., Bain, J.D., & Pike, R. (1990).
Associative interference effects in recognition and
recall. Journal of Experimental Psyclwlogy: Learning,
Memory and Cognition,16, 813-824.

Eich, J. M. (1982). A composite holographic associative
recall model. Psyclwlogical Review, 89,627-661.

Eich, J. M. (1985). Levels of processing, encoding
specificity, elaboration, and CHARM. Psyclwlogical Review,
92,1-38.

Forster, K. I., & Davies, C. (1984). Repetition priming and
frequency attenuation in lexical access. Journal of
Experimental Psyclwlogy: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition,JO, 680-699.

Flexser, A. L. & Tulving, E. (1978). Retrieval
independence in recognition and recall. Psyclwlogical
Review, 85,153-171.

Gillund, G., & Shiffrin, R M. (1984). A retrieval model for
both recognition and recall. Psyclwlogical Review,
91,1-61.

Glanzer, M., & Adams, J. K. (1990). The mirror effect in
recognition memory: Data and theory. Journal of
Experimental Psyclwlogy: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition,16, 5-16.

Graf, P., Squire, L. R., & Mandler, G. (1984). The
information that amnesic patients do not forget Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition,JO, 164-178.

Gronlund, S. D., & Ratcliff, R. (1989). Tune course of
item and associative information: Implications for global
memory modeL<:. Journal of Experimental Psyclwlogy:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, IS, 846-858.

Hintzman, D. L. (1986). Schema abstraction in a multiple
trace memory model. Psyclwlogical Review, 93, 429-445.

Hintzman, D. L. (1988). Judgments of frequency and
recognition memory in a multiple trace memory model.
Psychological Review, 95, 528-551.

Hirst, W., Johnson, M. K., Phelps, E. A., & Volpe, B. T.
(1988). Recognition and recall in amnesics. Journal of
Experimental Psyclwlogy: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition,l2, 445-451.

Hwnphreys, M. S. (1976). Relational information and the
context effect in recognition memory. Memory & Cognition,
4, 221-232.

Hwnphreys, M. S. (1978). Item and relational information:
A case for context independent retrieval. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior,17, 179-187.

Hwnphreys, M. S., & Bain, J. D. (1983). Recognition
memory: A cue and information analysis. Memory &
Cognition,Jl, 583-600.

Hwnphreys, M.S., Bain, J.D., & Pike, R. (1989). Different
ways to cue a coherent memory system: A theory for
episodic, semantic and procedural tasks. Psyclwlogica/
Review, 96, 208-233. 17. COMPONENTS IN RECOGNITION 329

Hwnphreys, M. S., Burt, J., Bain, J. D., & Dennis, S. J.
(1990, August). The distributed

representation of words. Paper presented at a conference
on The Connectionist Ap

proach to Memory, Reasoning, and Language, The University
of Queensland.

Hwnphreys, M.S., Pike, R, Bain, J.D., & Tehan, G. (1989).
Global matching: A comparison

of the SAM, Minerva IT, Matrix and TODAM models. Journal of
Mathematical

Psychology, 33,36-67.

Hwnphreys, M.S., Wiles, J., & Bain, J. D. (1990, July).
Direct access: Cues with separate

histories. Paper presented at Attention and Performance
XIV, Ann Arbor.

Hupert, F. A., & Piercy, M. (1976). Recognition memory in
amnesic patients: Effects of

temporal context and familiarity of the material. Cortex,
12, 3-20.

Jacoby, L. L. (1983). Perceptual enhancement: Persistent
effects of an experiment Journal

of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 9, 21-38.

Jacoby, L. L. & Dallas, M. (1981). On the relationship
between autobiographical memory

and perceptual learning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 110,21-38.

Jacoby, L. L. & Hayman, C. A. G. (1987). Specific visual
transfer in word identification.

Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cogntion, 13, 456-463.
Jacoby, L. L., & Whitehouse, K. (1989). An illusion of
memory: False recognition influenced by unconscious
perception. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
118, 126135.

Kintsch, W. (1977). Memory and Cognition, New York: Wiley.

Kirsner, K., & Dunn, J. C. (1985). The perceptual record:
A common factor in repetition priming and attribute
retention. In M. Posner and 0. S. Marin (Eds.), Attention
and

Peiformance XI (pp. 547-565). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.

Krafka, C., & Penrod, S. (1985). Reinstatement of context
in a field experiment on

eyewitness identification. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 49, 58-69.

Light, L. & Carter-Sobell, L. (1970). Effects of changed
semantic context on recognition

memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 9,
1-11.

Mandler, G. (1972). Organization and recognition. In E.
Tulving and W. Donaldson (Eds.), Organization of memory
(pp. 146-166). New York: Academic Press.

Mandler, G. (1980). Recognizing: The judgment of previous
occurrence. Psychological

Review, 87,252-271.

Mandler, G., Rabinowitz, J. C., & Simon, R A. (1981 ).
Coordinate ocganization: The holistic

representation of word pairs. American Journal of
Psychology, 94, 209-222.

Murdock, B. B., Jr. (1982). A theory for the storage and
retrieval of item and associative

information. Psychological Review, 89, 609-626.

Nelson, D. L., & McEvoy, C. L. (1979). Effects of retention
interval and modality on sensory
and semantic trace information. Memory & Cognition, 7,
257-262.

330 HUMPHREYS AND BAIN

Pike, R. (1984). A comparison of convolution and matrix
distributed memory systems. Psychological Review,
91,281-294.

Rumelhart, D. R, McClelland, I. L., & the PDP Research
Group (Eds.) (1986). Parallel distributed processing:
Vol. 1, Foundations. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Tulving, E. (1976). Ecphoric processes in recall and
recognition. In I. Brown (Ed.), Recall and recognition
(pp. 37-73).l..ondon: Wiley.

Tulving, E. (1983). Elements of episodic memory. New York:
Oxford University Press.

Wiles, J., Humphreys, M.S., Bain, J.D., & Dennis, S. J.
(1990). Direct access using separate cues: An intersection
of associative sets. Technical report, St. Lucia,
Queensland: The University of Queensland.
18 Composition, Distribution, and
Interference in Memory

Anderson, J. A., Silverstein, J. W., Ritz, S. R, & Jones,
R. S. (1977). Distinctive features, categorical
perception, and probability learning: Some applications of
a neural model. Psyclwlogical Review, 84,413-451.

Anderson, J. R. (1983). The architecture of cognition.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Anderson, J. R., & Bower, G. H. (1973). Human associative
memory. Washington, DC: Winston.

Atkinson, R. C., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1968). Hwnan memory: A
proposed system and its control processes. In K. W.
Spence, & J. T. Spence (Eds.), The psyclwlogy of learning
and motivation: Advances in research and theory, Vol. 2
(pp. 89-195). New York: Academic Press.

Eich, J. M. ( 1982). A composite holographic associative
recall model. Psyclwlogical Review, 89, 627-661.

Eich, J. M. (1985). levels of processing, encoding
specificity, elaboration and CHARM. Psyclwlogical Review,
92,1-38.

van Gelder, T. J. (1989). Distributed Representation.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of
Pittsburgh.

Gillwtd, G., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1984). A retrieval model
for both recognition and recall. Psyclwlogical Review, 91,
1-67.

Grossberg, S. (1970). Some networks that can learn,
remember, and reproduce any nwnber of complicated
space-time patterns: II. Studies in Applied Mathematics,
49,135-166.

Grossberg, S., & Stone, G. (1986). Neural dynamics of word
recognition and recall: Attentional priming, learning, and
resonance. Psychological Review, 93, 46-74.

Hintzman, D. L (1986). "Schema abstraction" in a
multiple-trace memory model. Psyclwlogical Review,
93,411-428.

Hintzman, D. L (1988). Judgments of frequency and
recognition memory in a multiple trace memory model.
Psyclwlogical Review, 95,528-551.

Hopfield, J. J. (1982). Neural networks and physical
systems with emergent collective computational abilities.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 79,
25542558.

Hopfield, J. J. (1984). Neurons with graded response have
collective computational properties like those of two-state
neurons. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
81,3088-3092.

Kanerva, P. (1988). Sparse distributed memory. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.

Kohonen, T. (1984). Self-organization and associative
memory. New York: Springer-Verlag. 346 SHIFFRIN AND
MURNANE Kruschke, I. K. (1990). Alcove: A connectionist
model of category learning. (Research Report No. 19).
Bloomington, IN: Cognitive Science Program, Indiana
University. Loftus, E. F. (1979). The malleability of
memory. American Scientist, 67, 312-320. McClelland, J.
L., & Rumelhart, D. E. (1985). Distributed memory and the
representation of general and specific information.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 114, 159-188.
Melton, A. W., & Irwin, J. M. (1940). The influence of
degree of interpolated learning on retroactive inhibition
and the overt transfer of specific responses. American
Journal of Psychology, 53, 173-203. Metcalfe, J., &
Murdock, B. B., Jr. (1981). An encoding and retrieval model
of single-trial free recall. Journal ofVerbaiLearning and
Verbal Behavior, 20, 161-189. Murdock, B. B., Jr. (1962).
The serial position effect of free recall. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 64,482-488. Murdock, B. B., Jr.
(1982). A theory for the storage and retrieval of item and
associative information. Psychological Review, 89,
609-626. Murdock B. B., Jr., & Lamon, M. (1988). The
replacement effect: Repeating some items while replacing
others. Memory & Cognition, 16,91-101. Murnane, K., &
Shiffrin, R. M. (in press-a). Word repetitions in sentence
recognition. Memory & Cognition. Murnane, K., &
Shiffrin, R. M. (in press-b).lnterference and the
representation of events in memol)'. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition.
Pike, R. (1984). Comparison of convolution and matrix
distributed memory systems for associative recall and
recognition. Psychological Review, 91, 281-294.
Raaijmakers, J. G. W., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1980). SAM: A
theory of probabilistic search of associative memory.In G.
H. Bower (Ed.), The psychology of/earning and motivation:
Advances in research and theory (Vol. 14, pp. 207-262).
New York: Academic Press. Raaijmakers, I. G. W., &
Shiffrin, R. M. (1981). Search of associative memol)'.
Psychological Review, 88,93-134. Ratcliff, R., Clark, S.,
& Shiffrin, R. M. (1990). The list-strength effect. I. Data
and discussion. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 16,163-178. Shiffrin, R.
M., Ratcliff, R., & Clark, S. (1990). The list-strength
effect: II. Theoretical mechanisms. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
16, 179-195. Tulving, E., & Hastie, R. (1972).1nhibition
effects of intralist repetition in free recall. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 92,297-304. Yonelinas, A. P.,
Hockley, W. E., & Murdock, B. B. (1991). A demonstration of
the list-strength effect in recognition memory. Manuscript
submitted for publication.
19 Automaticity and Memory

Ackerman, P. L (1988). Determinants of individual
differences during skill acquisition: Cognitive abilities
and information processing. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 117,288-318.

Allport, D. A. (1980). Attention and performance. In G.
Oaxton (Ed.), Cognitive psychology (pp. 112-153). London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul.

Anderson, I. R. (1982). Acquisition of cognitive skill.
Psychological Review, 89, 396-406.

Burrows, D. & Murdock, B. B., Jr. (1969). Effects of
extended practice on high-speed scanning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 82,231-237.

Cheng, P. W. (1985). Restructuring versus automaticity:
Alternative accounts of skill acquisition. Psychological
Review, 92,414-423.

Cohen, I. D., Dunbar, K. & McOelland, I. L (1990). On the
control of automatic processes: A parallel distributed
processing account of the Stroop effect. Psychological
Review, 97, 332-361. 19. AUTOMATICITY AND MEMORY 365

Compton, B. J. & Logan, G. D. (in press). The transition
from algorithm to memory retrieval in memory based
theories of automaticity. Memory & Cognition.

Hasher, L. & Zacks, R. T. (1979). Automatic and effortful
processes in memory. Journal of

Experimental Psychology: General,108, 356-388.

Jacoby, L. L., & Brooks, L. R. (1984). Nonanalytic
cognition: Memory, perception and

concept learning. In G. H. Bower (Ed.), The psychology of
learning and motivation (pp. 1-74). New York: Academic
Press.

Klapp, S. T., Boches, C. A., Trabert, M. L., & Logan, G.
D. (in press). Automatizing alphabet arithmetic: 2. Are
there practice effects after automaticity is attained?
Journal of

Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition.
LaBerge, D. & Samuels, S. J. (1974). Toward a theory of
automatic information processing in reading. Cognitive
Psychology, 6, 293-323.

Logan, G. D. (1978). Attention in character
classification: Evidence for the automaticity of

component stages. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 107, 32-63.

Logan, G. D. (1979). On the use of a concurrent memory
load to measure attention and automaticity. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Perform

ance, 5, 189-207.

Logan, G. D. (1985). Skill and automaticity: Relations,
implications, and future directions.

Canadian Journal of Psychology, 39,367-386.

Logan, G. D. (1988a). Automaticity, resources and memory:
Theoretical controversies and

practical implications. Human Factors, 30, 583-598.

Logan, G. D. (1988b). Toward an instance theory of
automatization. Psychological Review,

95. 492-527.

Logan, G. D. (1990). Repetition priming and automaticity:
Common underlying mecha

nisms? Cognitive Psychology, 22, 1-35.

Logan, G. D. (1991). Shopes of reaction time distributions
and shapes of learning curves:

A test of the instance theory of automaticity. Manuscript
submitted for publication.

Logan, G. D. & Cowan, W. B. (1984). On the ability to
inhibit thought and action: A theory

of an act of control. Psychological Review, 91,295-327.

Logan, G. D. & Klapp, S. T. (in press). Automatizing
alphabet arithmetic: 1. Is extended
practice necessary to produce automaticity? Journal of
Experimental Psychology:

Learning, Memory, and Cognition.

MacKay, D. G. (1982). The problem of flexibility, fluency,
and speed-accuracy tradeoff in

skilled behavicr. Psychological Review, 89,483-506.

Murdock, B. B., Jr. (1974). Human memory: Theory and data.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence

Erlbaum Associates.

Navon, D. (1984 ). Resources: A theoretical soup stone?
Psychological Review, 91, 216-234.

366 LOGAN

Navon, D. & Gopher, D. (1979). On the economy of the human
processing system. Psychological Review, 86, 214-255.

Navon, D. & Miller, J. (1987). Role of outcome conflict in
dual-task interference. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 13, 435-448.

Neely, J. H. (1977). Semantic priming and retrieval from
lexical memory: Roles of inhibitionless spreading
activation and limited-capacity attention. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 106,226-254.

Newell, A. & Rosenbloom, P. S. (1981). Mechanisms of skill
acquisition and the law of practice. In J. R. Anderson
(Ed.), Cognitive skills and their acquisition (pp. 1-55).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Posner, M.l. & Snyder, C. R R (1975). Attention and
cognitive control. In R L Solso (Ed.), information
processing and cognition: The Loyola symposium (pp. 55-85).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Poulton, E. C. (1982). Influential companions: Effects of
one strategy on another in the within-subjects designs of
cognitive psychology. Psychological Bulletin, 91, 673-690.

Ryan, C. (1983). Reassessing the automaticity-control
distinction: Item recognition as a paradigm case.
Psychological Review, 90, 171-178.
Salthouse, T. A. (1986). Perceptual, cognitive, and motoric
aspects of transcription typing. Psychological Bulletin,
99, 303-319.

Schneider, W. (1985). Toward a model of attention and the
development of automatic processing. In M. I. Posner & 0.
S. Marin (Eds.), Attention and Performance XI (pp.
474-492). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Schneider, W. & Shiffrin, R. M. (1977). Controlled and
automatic human information processing: I. Detection,
search, and attention. Psychological Review, 84, 1-66.

Shiffrin, R. M. & Schneider, W. (1977). Controlled and
automatic human information processing: II. Perceptual
learning, aut~atic attending, and a general theory.
Psychological Review, 84, 127-190.

Siegler, R S. ( 1987). The perils of averaging data over
strategies: An example from children's addition. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 117, 258-275.

Soetens, E., Deboeck, M., & Heuting, J. (1984). Automatic
aftereffects in two-choice reaction time: A mathematical
representation of some concepts. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 10,581-598.

Treisman, A. & Gormican, S. (1988). Feature analysis in
early vision: Evidence from search asymmetries.
Psychological Review, 95, 15-48.

Wickens, C. D. (1984). Processing resources in attention.
In R Parasuraman & R Davies (Eds.), Varieties of attention
(pp. 63-102). New York: Academic Press.
20 The Construction-Integration Model: A
Framework for Studying Memory for Text

Gernsbacher, M.A., Hargreaves, D. J., & Beeman, M. (1989).
Building and accessing clausal representations: The
advantage of first mention versus the advantage of clause
recency. Journal of Memory and Language, 28,135-155.

Kintsch, W. (1974). The represenlation of meaning in
memory. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence &lbaum Associates.

Kintsch, W. (1985). Text processing: A psychological
model. In T. A. van DiJlc (Ed.), Handbook of discourse
analysis (pp. 231-243). London: Academic Press.

Kintsch, W. (1988). The use of knowledge in discourse
processing: A construction-integration model.
Psychological Review, 95, 163-182.

Kintsch, W. (in press-a). Kognitionspsychologische Modelle
des Textverstehens: Literarische Texte. InK. Reusser, & M.
Reusser (Eds.), Verstehen lernen-Verstehen lehren Bern:
Hans Huber.

Kintsch, W. (in press-b). How readers construct situation
models for stories: The role of syntactic cues and causal
inferences. In A. F. Healy, S. M. Kosslyn, & R. M. Shiffrin
(Eds.), From learning theory to cognitive processes:
Essays in honor of William K. Estes. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence &lbaum Associates.

Kintsch, W., & van Dijk, T. A. (1978). Towards a model of
text comprehension and production. Psychological Review,
85,363-394.

Kintsch, W., Welsch, D., Schmalhofer, F., & Zimny, S.
(1990). Sentence memory: A theoretical analysis. Journal
of Memory and Language, 29, 133-159.

Mannes, S. M., & Kintsch, W. (1987). Knowledge
organization and text organization. Cognition and
lnstruction,4, 91-115.

Mannes, S.M., & Kintsch, W. (in press). Planning routine
computing tasks: Understanding what to do. Cognitive
Science. 20. CONSTRUCTION-INTEGRATION 385

McKoon, G., & Ratcliff, R (1988). Contextually relevant
aspects of meaning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Menwry, and
Cognition,J4, 331-343.

Newell, A. (1990). The 1987 William James lectures:
Unified theories of cognition. Cam

bridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

van Dijk, T. A., & Kintsch, W. (1983). Strategies of
discourse comprehension. New York:

Academic Press

Welsch, D. (1989). A connectionist approach to recognition
memory for sentences. Unpub

lished Master's thesis, University of Colorado, Boulder.
21 Ben Murdock and Complexity of Memory

Estes, W. K. (1960).l..eaming theory and the new "mental
chemisiJy." Psychological Review, 67,207-223.

Gemsbacher, M. A, Hargreaves, D. J., & Beeman, M. (1989).
Building and accessing clausal representations: The
advantage of first mention versus the advantage of clause
recency. Journal ofMemoryandl.Anguage,28, 735-755.

Hyde, T. S., & Jenkins, J. J. (1969) Differential effects
of incidental tasks on recall and organization of highly
associated words. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 82,
275-292.

Jacoby, L L (1978). On interpreting the effects of
repetition: Solving a problem versus remembering a
solution. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior,
17, 649-667.

Johnson-Laird, P. N., Gibbs, G., & de Mowbray, J. (1978).
Meaning, amount of processing, and memory for words.
Memory & Cognition, 6, 372-375.

Keppel, G., Postman, L, & Zavortink, B. (1968). Studies of
learning to learn: VIII. The influence of massive amounts
of training upon the learning and retention of
paired-associate lists. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 7, 790-796.

Kolers, P. A. (1975). Memorial consequences of automatized
encoding. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Learning and Memory,], 689-701.

Madigan, S. A, & McCabe, L (1971). Perfect recall and
total forgetting: A problem for models of short-term
memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior,JO,
101-106.

Mathews, R C. (1977). Semantic judgments as encoding
operations: The effects of attention to particular
semantic categories on the usefulness of interitem
relations in recall. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Learning andMemory,3,160-113.

McClelland, A. G. R., Rawles, R. E., & Sinclair, F. E.
(1981). The effects of search criteria and retrieval cue
availability on memory for words. Memory & Cognition,
9,164-168.
Murdock, B. B., Jr. (1962). The serial position effect in
free recall. Journal of Experimental Psychology,
64,482-488.

Murdock, B. B., Jr. (1974). Human memory: Theory and data.
Potomac, MD: Lawrence &lbaum Associates.

Murdock, B. B., Jr., & Babick, A J. (1961). The effect of
repetition on the retention of individual words. American
Journal of Psychology, 74, 596-601.

Murdock, B. B., Jr., & Cook, C. D. (1960). On fitting the
exponential. Psychological Reports, 6, 63-69.

Norman, D. A (Ed.). (1970). Models of human memory. New
York: Academic Press.

Platt, J. R. (1964). Strong inference. Science,146,
347-353.

Ratcliff, R., Clark, S., & Shiffrin, R M. (1990). The
list-strength effect. I. Data and discussion. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
16,163-178. 396 TULVING Rock, I. (1957). The role of
repetition in associative learning. American Journal of
Psyclwlogy, 70, 186-193. Slamecka, N., & Graf, P. (1978).
The generation effect: Delineation of a phenomenon.
Journal of Experimental PsycJwlogy: Human Learning and
Memory, 4, 592-604. Waugh, N. C. (1970). On the effective
duration of a repeated word. Journal of Verbal Learning
and Verbal Behavior, 9, 587-595. Waugh,N. C., &Norman, D.
A. (1965). Primarymemory.PsycJwlogicalReview, 72,89-104.
Wright, A. A., Santiago, H. C., Sands, S. F., Kendrick, D.
F., & Cook, R G. (1985). Memory processing of serial
lists by pigeons, monkeys, and people. Science,
229,287-289.
22 Composite Memories

Anderson, J. A. (1986). Cognitive capabilities of a
parallel system. In E. Bienstock, F. Fogelman-Soulie, & G.
Weisbuch (Eds.), Disordered systems and biological
organization (NATO ASI Series, Series F, Volwne 20).
Berlin: Springer.

Anderson, J. A., & Hinton, G. E. (1981). Models of
information processing in the brain. In G. E. Hinton & J.
A. Anderson (Eds. ), Parallel models of associative memory
(pp. 9-48). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Anderson, J. A., Silverstein, J. W., Ritz, S. A., & Jones,
R. S. (1977). Distinctive features, categorical
perception, and probability learning: Some applications of
a neural model. Psyclwlogical Review, 84,413-451.

Bartlett, F. C. (1954). Remembering: A study in
experimental and social psyclwlogy. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. (Original work published 1932)

Baxt, W. (1989, November). Predicting myocardial
infarction with a back-propagation network. Paper
presented to the Parallel Distributed Processing Research
Group, University of California, San Diego.

Belli, R. F. (1989). Influences of misleading postevent
information: Misinformation interference and acceptance.
Journal of Experimental Psyclwlogy: General,J18, 72-85.

Cottrell, G. W. & Heming, M. K. (1990, July). Face
recognition using unsupervised feature extraction.
Proceedings of the First International Neural Network
Conference, Paris (Vol. 1, pp. 322-325). Dordricht:
Kluwer.

Cowan, J. D. (1990). Neural networks: The early days. In
D. S. Touretzky (Ed.), Advances in neural information
processing systems 2 (pp. 828-842). San Mateo: Kaufman.

Gab<r,D. (1954). Communication theory
andcybemetics.IRETransactions, CT-1, 4,19-31.

Gab<r, D. (1968). Holographic model of temporal recall.
Nature, 217, 584.

Galton, F. (1878). Composite Portraits. Nature,J8, 97-100.

Galton, F. (1879). Generic Images. Extract from Proceedings
of the Royal Institute, reprinted in F. Galton, Inquiries
into the human faculty and its development. (1907). London:
J.M. Dent & Sons.

Galton., F. (1907)./nquiries into human faculty and its
development. London: J.M. Dent & Sons. (Original work
published in 1883)

Galton, F. (1908). Memories of my life. London: Methuen.

Gombrich, E. H. (1961). Arl and Illusion: A study in the
psyclwlogy of pictorial representation. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.

Hintzman, D. L. (1986). "Schema abstraction" in a
multiple-trace memory model. Psychological Review,
93,411-428.

Jastrow, J. (1885). Composite portraiture. Science,
6(134),165-168.

422 METCALFE

Kohonen, T. (1984). Self-organization and associative
memory. Berlin: Springer.

Kohonen, T., Oja, E., & l..ehtio, P. (1981). Storage and
processing of information in distributed associative
memory systems. In G. E. Hinton & I. A. Anderson (Eds.),
Parallel models of associative memory (pp. 105-144).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Langlois, I. H., & Roggman, L A. (1990). Attractive faces
are only average. Psychological Science, I, 115-121.

Loftus, E. F. (1975). Leading question and eyewitness
report. Cognitive Psychology, 7, 560-572.

Loftus, E. F. (1979). Eyewitness testimony. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.

Loftus, E. F., Miller, D. G., & Burns, H. I. (1978).
Semantic integration of verbal information into a visual
memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning
and Memory, 4, 19-31.

Longuet-Higgins, H. C. (1968). Holographic model of
temporal recall. Nature, 217, 104.

McCloskey, M., & Zaragoza, M. (1985). Misleading postevent
information and memory for events: Arguments and evidence
against memory impairment hypothesis. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General,114,1-16.

Metcalfe, I. (1990). Composite holographic associative
recall model (CHARM) and blended memories in eyewitness
testimony. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General,119, 145-160.

Metcalfe, J. & Bjork, R. A. (in press). Composite models
never (well, hardly ever) compromise: Reply to Schooler
and Tanaka (1991). Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General.

Murdock, B. B. (1982). A theory for the storage and
retrieval of item and associative information.
Psychological Review, 89, 609-626.

Murdock, B. B. (1987). Serial-order in a distributed-memory
model. In D. S. Gorfein & R R. Hoffman (Eds.), Memory and
learning: The Ebbinghaus centennial conference (pp.
277-310). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Murdock, B. B. (1990).l..eaming in a distributed memory
model. In C.lzawa (Ed.), Current issues in cognitive
processes: The Floweree symposium on cognition (pp.
69-106). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Pike, R. (1984). Comparison of convolution and matrix
distributed memory systems for associative recall and
recognition. Psychological Review, 91, 281-294.

Psotka, I. (1983). The structure of visual concepts.
Unpublished manuscript, Computer systems Development, Army
Research Institute, Alexandria, Virginia.

Purnpelly, R. (1885). Composite portraits of members of the
National Academy of Science, Science,5, 378-379.

Romanes, G. I. (1883). Human faculty and its development.
Nature, 28, 97-98. 22. COMPOSITE MEMORIES 423

Rosch, E. H., & Mervis, C. B. (1975). Family resemblances:
Studies in the internal structures

of categories. Cognitive Psyclwlogy, 8, 382-439.

Rosenblatt, F. (1962). Principles ofneurodynamics. New
York: Spartan.
Stoddard, J. T. (1886). Composite photography. The Century
Illustrated Monthly Magazine,

32,NewSeries Vol.11, 750-757.

Tayl<r, W. C. (1885). Three new portraits of Washington,
Science, 149, unnwnbered plate.

Tversky, B. & Tuchin, M. (1989). A reconciliation of the
evidence on eyewitness testimony:

Comments on McCloskey and Zaragoza. Journal of
Experimental Psyclwlogy: Gen

eral, 118, 86-91.

Van Heerden, P. J. (1963). A new optical method of storing
and retrieving information.

Applied Optics, 2, 387-392.

von der Malsburg, C. (1989, November). Colloquiwn presented
at the University of

California, San Diego.

Westlake, P.R. (1970). The possibilities of neural
holographic process in the brain. Kyber

netik, 7, 129, 153.

Willshaw, D. (1981). Holography, associative memory, and
inductive generalization. In G.

E. Hinton & J. A. Anderson (Eds.), Parallel models of
associative memory (pp. 83-1 04).

Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbawn Associates.

Wittgenstein, L (1958). Philosophical investigations (G.
E. M. Anscombe, Trans.). New

York: McMillan.

Zipser, D. (1986). Biologically plausible models of place
recognition and goal location. In

J. L McClelland & D. E. Rwnelhart (Eds.), Parallel
Distributed Processing, Vol. 2.
(pp. 432-470). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
23 Serial Recall of Tachistoscopic Letter
Strings

Mewhort, D. J. K. (1984). Scanning and the distribution of
attention: The current status of Heron's
sensory-motortheory.ln W. Prinz & A F. Sanders (Eds.),
Cognition and motor processes (pp. 139-148). Heidelberg:
Springer-Verlag.

Mewhort, D. J. K., & Campbell, A J. (1978). Processing
spatial information and the selective-masking effect.
Perception & Psychophysics, 24, 93-101.

Mewhort, D. J. K., & Campbell, A J. (1981). Toward a model
of skilled reading: An analysis of performance in
tachistoscopic tasks. In G. E. MacKinnon & G. Waller
(Eds.), Reading research: Advances in theory and practice
(Vol. 3, pp. 39-118). New York: Academic Press.

Mewhort, D. J. K., Popham, D., & James, G. (1989,
November). TODAM applied to serial recall of linear
tachistoscopic displays. Paper presented at the annual
meeting of the Psychonomic Society, Atlanta, GA

Murdock, B. B., Jr. (1982). A theory for the storage and
retrieval of item and associative information.
Psychological Review, 89, 609-626.

Murdock, B. B., Jr. (1983). A distributed memory model for
serial-order information. Psychological Review, 90,
316-338.

Murdock, B. B., Jr. (1987). Serial-order effects in a
distributedmemory model. In D. S. Gorfein & R. R. Hoffman
(Eds.), Memory and learning. The Ebbinghaus centennial
conference (pp. 277-310). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.

Murdock, B. B. (1989). Learning in a distributed memory
model. In C.Izawa (Ed.), Current issues in cognitive
processes: The Tulane Flowerree symposium in cognition
(pp. 69106). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Scheerer, E. (1972). Order of report and order of scanning
in tachistoscopic recognition. Canadian Journal of
Psychology, 26, 382-390.

Scheerer, E. (1973). A fin1her test of the scanning
hypothesis in tachistoscopic recognition. Canadian Journal
of Psychology, 27, 95-102.
Tramer, 0., Butler, B. E., & Mewhort, D. J. K. (1985).
Evidence for scanning with unilateral visual presentation
ofletters. Brain & Language, 25,1-18.

van der Heijden, A. H. C. (1987). Central selection in
vision. In H. Heuer & A. F. Sanders (Eds.), Perspectives
on perception and action (pp. 421-446). Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Weber, E. U. (1988). Expectation and variance of item
resemblance distributions in a convolution-correlation
model of distributed memory. Journal of Mathematical
Psychology,32,1-43.

Wolff, P., & Mewhort, D. J. K. (1986). Building
higher-order units in tachistoscopic identification: A
test of two models. Psychological Research, 48, 79-85.

Young, R K. (1968). Serial learning. InT. R Dixon & D. L.
Horton (Eds.), Verba/learning and general behavior theory
(pp. 122-148). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
24 Gradual Unlearning and Catastrophic
Interference: A Comparison of Distributed
Architectures

Barnes, J. M., & Underwood, B. J. (1959). "Fate" of
first-learned associations in transfer theory. Journal of
ExperimenJal Psychology, 58, 97-105.

Hetherington, P. A, & Seidenberg, M. S. (1989). Is there
"catastrophic interference" in connectionist networks?
Proceedings of the 11th annual conference of the cognitive
science society (pp. 26-33). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbawn Associates.

Hinton, G. E., & Plaut, D. C. (1987). Using fast weights
to de blur old memories. Proceedings of the 9th annual
conference of the cognitive science society (pp. 177-186).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence &-Ibawn Associates.

Hinton, G. E., McClelland, J. L., & Rwnelhart, D. E.
(1986). Distributed representations. In D. E. Rwnelhart,
J. L. McOelland, & the PDP Research Group, Parallel
distributed processing, Volume 1: Foundations (pp.
77-109). Cambridge: MIT Press.

Hwnphreys, M.S., Bain, J.D., & Pike, R. (1989). Different
ways to cue a coherent memory system: A theory for
episodic, semantic, and procedural tasks. Psychological
Review, 96, 208-233.

Jordan, M.l. (1986). An introduction to linear algebra in
parallel distributed processing. In D. E. Rwnelhart, J. L.
McOelland, & the PDP Research Group, Parallel distributed
processing, Volume 1: Foundations (pp. 365-422).
Cambridge: MIT Press.

Kohonen, T. (1977). Associative memory: A system
theoretical approach. New York: Springer Verlag.

Kortge, C. A. (1990). Episodic memory in connectionist
networks. Proceedings of the 12th annual conference of
the cognitive science society (pp. 764-771). Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbawn Associates.

Lewandowsky, S., & Murdock, B. B. (1989a). A distributed
memory model for associative learning. In D. Vickers & P.
L. Smith (Eds.),Human information processing: Measures,
mechanisms, and models (pp. 381-394). Amsterdam:
North-Holland.
Lewandowsky, S., & Murdock, B. B. (1989b). Memory for
serial order. Psychological Review, 96,25-57.

McClelland, J. L, & Rwnelhart, D. E. (1988). Explorations
in parallel distributed processing: A handbook of models,
programs, and exercises. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

McCloskey, M., & Cohen, N.J. (1989). Catastrophic
interference in connectionist networks: The sequential
learning problem. In G. H. Bower (Ed.), The psychology of
learning and motivation: Volume 24 (pp. 109-164). New
York: Academic Press.

Metcalfe Eich, J. (1982). A composite holographic
associative recall model. Psychological Review,
89,627-661. 476 LEWANDOWSKY Mewhort, D. J. K. (1990).
Alice in wonderland or psychology among the information
sciences. Psychological Research, 52, 158-162. Murdock,
B. B. (1982). A theory for the storage and retrieval of
item and associative information. Psychological Review,
89, 609-626. Murdock, B. B. (1983). A distributed memory
model for serial-order information. Psychological Review,
90, 316-338. Murdock, B. B., & Lamon, M. (1988). The
replacement effect: Repeating some items while replacing
others. Memory & Cognition,16, 91-101. Ratcliff, R.
(1990). Connectionist models of recognition memory:
Constraints imposed by learning and focgetting functions.
Psychological Review, 97, 285-308. Rodgers, J. L,
Nicewander, W. A., & Toothaker, L (1984). Linearly
independent, orthogonal, and \Ulcorrelated variables. The
American Statistician, 38, 133-134. Rumelhart, D. E.,
Hinton, G. E., & Williams, R. J. (1986). Learning internal
representations by error propagation. In D. E. Rumelhart,
J. L McClelland, & the PDP Research Group, Parallel
distributed processing, Volume 1: Foundations (pp.
318-362). Cambridge: MIT Press. Rumelhart, D. E.,
McClelland, J. L, & the PDP Research Group (1986). Parallel
distributed processing, Volume 1: Foundations. Cambridge:
MIT Press. Schonemann, P. H. (1987). Some algebraic
relations between involutions, convolutions, and
correlations, with applications to holographic memories.
Biological Cybernetics, 56, 367-374. Sloman, S. A., &
Rumelhart, D. E. (in press). Reducing interference in
distributed memory through episodic gating. In A. F.
Healy, S.M. Kosslyn, & R. M. Shiffrin (Eds.), From
learning theory to cognitive processes: Essays in honor of
William K. Estes. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates. Widrow, G., & Hoff, M. E. (1960). Adaptive
switching circuits. Institute of radio engineers, Western
electronic show and convention, convention record, Part 4,
96-104.
25 Why, Having So Many Neurons, Do We
Have So Few Thoughts?

Amari, S. I. (1977). Neural theory of association and
concept formation, Biological Cybernetics, 26, 175-185.

Anderson, J. A. (1973). A theory for the recognition of
items from short memorized lists. Psychological Review,
80,417-438.

Anderson, J. A, Gateley, M. T., Penz, P. A., & Collins, D.
R. (1990). Radar signal categorization using a neural
network. Proceedings of the IEEE, 78, 1646-1657. 506
ANDERSON Anderson, J. A., & Mozer, M. C. (1981).
Categorization and selective neurons. In G. E. Hinton & J.
A. Anderson, Parallel models of associative memory (pp.
213-236). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaurn Associates.
Anderson, J. A., Silverstein, J. W., Ritz, S. A., & Jones,
R. S. (1977). Distinctive features, categorical
perception, and probability learning: Some applications of
a neural model. Psychological Review, 84,413-451.
Attneave, F. (1971). Multistability in perception.
Scientific American, 225,62-71. Baldi, P., & Hornik, E.
(1989). Neural networks and principal component analysis:
Learning from examples without local minima. Neural
Networks 2, 53-58. Bamber, D. (1969). Reaction times and
error rates for "same""different" judgments of
multidimensional stimuli. Perception & Psychophysics, 6,
169-174. Barlow, H., & Foldiak,P. (1989). Adaptation and
decorrelation in the cortex. In R Durbin, C. Miall, & G.
Mitchison (Eds.), The computing neuron (pp. 54-72).
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. Benello, J., Mackie, A. W.,
& Anderson, J. A. (1989). Syntactic category disambiguation
with neural networks. Computer Speech and Language, 3,
203-217. Brown, K. T. (1955). Rate of apparent change in a
dynamic ambiguous figure as a fimction of observation
time. American Journal of Psychology, 68, 358-371.
Carpenter, G. A., & Grossberg, S. (1987). ART 2: Self
organization of stable category recognition codes for
analog input patterns. Applied Optics, 26,4919-4930.
Cohen, S. (1959). Rate of apparent change of a Necker cube
as a fimction of prior stimulation. American Journal of
Psychology, 72,327-344. Cottrell, G. W., Munro, P., &
Zipser, D. (1989). Image compression by back propagation: A
demonstration of extensional programming. InN. Sharkey
(Ed.), Models of cognition: A review of cognitive
science, Volume 1 (pp. 208-240). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Georgopoulos, A. P., Schwartz, A. B., & Kettner, R E.
(1986). Neuronal population coding of movement direction.
Science, 233, 1416-1419. Golden, R. M. (1986). The
"brain-state-in-a-box" neural model is a gradient descent
algorithm. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 30, 73-80.
Haken, H., & Stadler, M. (Eds.) (1990). Synergetics of
cognition. Berlin: Springer-Verlag. Hinton, G. E. ( 1981
). Implementing semantic networks in parallel hardware. In:
G. E. Hinton & J. A. Anderson (Eds.), Parallel models of
associative memory (pp. 161-187). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaurn Associates. Hopfield, J. J. (1982). Neural
networks and physical systems with emergent collective
computational abilities. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 79, 25542558. 25. MANY NEURONS, FEW
THOUGHTS 507

Hopfield, J. J. (1984). Neurons with graded response have
collective computational properties like those of
two-state neurons. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 81, 3088-3092.

Kawamoto, A. H. (1985). The (re)solution of semantic
ambiguity. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Brown
University.

Kawamoto, A H., & Anderson, J. A (1985). A neural network
model of multistable perception. Acta Psychologica 59,
35-65.

Knapp, A. G., & Anderson, J. A. (1984). Theory of
categorization based on distributed memory storage.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 10,616-637.

Kosko, B. (1988). Bidirectional associative memories.JEEE
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 18,49-60.

Linsker, R. (1988). Self-organization in a perceptual
network. Computer, 21, 105-117.

Luce, R. D. (1986). Response times. New York: Oxford
University Press.

McClelland, J. L., Rumelhart, D. E. (1981 ). An
interactive activation model of context effects in letter
perception: Part I. An account of basic fmdings.
Psychological Review, 88, 375-407.

Mcilwain, J. T. (1976). Large receptive fields and spatial
transformations in the nervous system. In R. Porter
(Ed.), International review of physiology. Neurophysiology
11, Volume 10 (pp. 223-247). Baltimore: University Park
Press.
Minsky, M., & Papert, S. (1969). Perceptrons. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.

Necker, L. A (1832). Observations on some remarkable
phenomena seen in Switzerland; and an optical phenomenon
which occurs on viewing of a crystal or geometrical solid.
Philosophical Magazine, 3 ser., 1, 329-343.

Pitts, J., & McCulloch, W. S. (1947). How we know
universals: The perception of auditory and visual forms.
Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics, 9, 127-147.

Ratcliff, R. (1978). A theory of memory retrieval.
Psychological Review, 85, 59-108.

Ratcliff, R., Clark, S. E., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1990).
List-strength effect I. Data and discussion. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
16, 163-195.

Rumelhart, D. E., & McClelland, J. L. (1982). An
interactive activation model of context effects in letter
perception: Part 2. The contextual enhancement effect and
some tests and extensions of the model. Psychological
Review, 89, 60-94.
26 Retrieval Measures in Distributed
Memory Models

Shepard, R N. (1987). Toward a universal law of
generalization for psychological science. Science,237,
1317-1323.

Snodgrass, J. G. (1987). Discussion on the chapter by
Murdock. In D. S. Gorfein & R. R Hoffman (Eds.), Memory
and learning: The Ebbinghaus centennial conference (pp.
311-318). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
